                                                    Dr. Post-Training : A Data Regularization
                                                         Perspective on LLM Post-Training


                                                              Pingbang Hu1∗ Xueshen Liu2 Z. Morley Mao2 Jiaqi W. Ma1∗
                                                          1
                                                              University of Illinois Urbana–Champaign 2 University of Michigan
                                                               {pbb,jiaqima}@illinois.edu {liuxs,zmao}@umich.edu




arXiv:2605.07063v1 [cs.LG] 8 May 2026
                                                                                              Abstract
                                                    Data selection methods address a critical challenge in LLM post-training: effec-
                                                    tively leveraging scarce, high-fidelity target data alongside abundant but imperfectly
                                                    aligned general training data. In this work, we move beyond the data-selection
                                                    framing and introduce Dr. Post-Training (Data-Regularized Post-Training), a
                                                    novel framework that reconceptualizes general training data as a data-induced
                                                    regularizer that prevents overfitting to the scarce target objective, rather than serv-
                                                    ing as a pool for selection. Specifically, our framework proposes that at each
                                                    training step, construct a feasible set of model update directions using the general
                                                    training data, and project the model update direction specified by the scarce target
                                                    data onto that feasible set. Standard training and existing data selection methods
                                                    arise as special cases with different choices of the data-induced regularizer, and
                                                    these methods correspond to different points on a bias–variance spectrum with
                                                    different regularization strength. Building on this view, we propose a family of
                                                    methods offering a richer design space and more flexible bias–variance tradeoffs.
                                                    For practical LLM-scale use, we introduce careful system optimizations that realize
                                                    these methods with minimal overhead. Extensive experiments across SFT, RLHF,
                                                    and RLVR show that our methods consistently outperform state-of-the-art data
                                                    selection baselines, and system benchmarks confirm their efficiency.


                                        1     Introduction
                                        Post-training is a critical stage where pretrained large language models (LLMs) are adapted to
                                        desired downstream behaviors, including instruction following, dialogue, safety alignment, and
                                        domain-specific reasoning. It is typically carried out through supervised fine-tuning (SFT) [Mishra
                                        et al., 2022, Muennighoff et al., 2024] or reinforcement learning (RL) variants such as reinforcement
                                        learning from human feedback (RLHF) [Christiano et al., 2017, Ouyang et al., 2022] and reinforce-
                                        ment learning with verifiable rewards (RLVR) [Guo et al., 2025]. In many practical post-training
                                        settings, however, the data that most directly reflects the downstream objective is scarce: high-quality
                                        demonstrations [Ouyang et al., 2022], domain-specific examples [Ling et al., 2025], preference
                                        labels [Casper et al., 2023], or task-specific validation data [Perez et al., 2021] are often expensive to
                                        obtain. On the other hand, practitioners often have access to a large pool of general training data, such
                                        as broad instruction-tuning mixtures [Wang et al., 2023a, Lambert et al., 2024], which are abundant
                                        and cheaper but only partially aligned with the target objective [Gururangan et al., 2020, Xia et al.,
                                        2024a, He et al., 2024]. This creates a natural tradeoff in post-training: training on the scarce target
                                        data is faithful to the downstream objective but statistically noisy, while training on the abundant
                                        general data is more stable but may be biased by the misalignment with the target.
                                        This tradeoff has led to a growing literature on data-centric methods for post-training, including
                                        heuristic filtering [Bai et al., 2022, Ethayarajh et al., 2022], data mixture optimization [Iyer et al.,
                                            ∗ Corresponding to: Pingbang Hu and Jiaqi W. Ma



                                        Preprint.
2022, Wang et al., 2023a], offline data selection [He et al., 2024, Xia et al., 2024a], and online
data selection [Wang et al., 2024b, Hu et al., 2025b]. Despite their algorithmic differences, most
existing approaches are operationalized through prioritizing “high-utility” samples from the general
training data according to some notion of utility, which makes it natural to frame the problem as data
selection [Albalak et al., 2024].
However, the data selection perspective obscures a more fundamental question: how to effectively
leverage abundant but imperfectly aligned general training data to improve a target objective defined
by much scarcer data. Asking how this general dataset should influence the model’s updates, rather
than just which data to select, opens up a much broader design space.
In this work, we introduce Dr. (Data-Regularized) Post-Training, a framework that formalizes this
idea. At each training step, the target signal specifies the ideal direction for the model’s update, while
the general training data constrains the update by projecting it onto a feasible set supported by the
available training data. From this viewpoint, general training data act as a data-induced regularizer:
they do not define the target objective itself, but restrict the admissible ways the model can move
toward it, preventing overfitting to the scarce target data.
Interestingly, standard training and existing data selection methods arise as special cases of the
proposed framework with different choices of the data-induced regularizer, and they can be viewed
as different points on a bias–variance spectrum, corresponding to different regularization strengths.
Building on this framework, we further propose new methods with Group-Wise Subset Update that
explicitly tune the strength of this data regularization, enabling more flexible tradeoffs between
approximation bias and statistical variance.
Making this broader design space useful in practice requires addressing a second challenge: efficient
implementation at LLM scale. Data-regularized updates require comparing training samples against
the target signal and then assembling the final update from the selected samples. These operations
introduce per-sample dependencies that are absent from standard training, where backpropagation
usually computes only the aggregate batch gradient. A naive implementation would either run
additional forward–backward passes or retain much more intermediate information than standard
training, both of which are undesirable under the memory constraints of modern post-training
pipelines.
To overcome this challenge, we conduct careful system-level optimizations to develop an efficient
realization of Dr. Post-Training. We first develop a customized tensor lifetime scheduling strategy that
selectively retains and releases intermediate quantities in the computation graph to obtain the data-
regularized update within one forward–backward pass with minimal memory overhead. We further
develop efficient approximate algorithms that significantly mitigate the main runtime bottleneck.
We also demonstrate the compatibility between the proposed methods and modern memory-saving
techniques such as LoRA finetuning or activation checkpointing.
Empirically, we validate Dr. Post-Training across the three post-training paradigms: SFT, RLHF, and
RLVR. Across all settings, our proposed methods consistently outperform both standard training and
prior state-of-the-art data-centric baselines, while incurring minimal system overhead.
In summary, our contributions are:

• Framework. We introduce Dr. Post-Training, a novel post-training framework that employs
  abundant yet imperfectly aligned general training data as data regularizers, with existing data
  selection methods as special cases.

• Method. Based on the Dr. Post-Training framework, we propose Group-Wise Subset Update,
  which provides a broader design space of data regularizers with more flexible tradeoffs between
  approximation bias and statistical variance.

• System. We show that the proposed methods admit efficient implementations under the memory
  constraints of modern LLM training.

• Experiments. We demonstrate consistent improvements of downstream performance over strong
  baselines across SFT, RLHF, and RLVR, and conduct extensive system benchmarking to validate
  the efficiency of our implementation.


                                                    2
2     Related Work

2.1   Data Optimization for LLM Post-Training

Data optimization for LLM post-training aims to improve downstream performance by prioritizing
high-utility training examples from large, heterogeneous corpora. We summarize several common
families and refer readers to Albalak et al. [2024], Deng et al. [2025] for a comprehensive overview.
Most existing methods approach this as a data selection problem, leveraging downstream performance-
related signals to determine which training examples the model sees. These span heuristic filtering
and quality scoring [Bai et al., 2022, Ethayarajh et al., 2022, Chen et al., 2024, Ivison et al., 2023, Lu
et al., 2024, Kung et al., 2023], dataset-level mixture design [Cao et al., 2023, Wei et al., 2022, Iyer
et al., 2022, Wang et al., 2023a], and offline example-level selection via influence-style estimators,
validation-based scoring, or importance weighting [Xia et al., 2024a, He et al., 2024, Wang et al.,
2024a, Koh and Liang, 2017, Pruthi et al., 2020, Ghorbani and Zou, 2019]. Online methods adapt
selection during training using per-step signals (e.g., loss- or gradient-based) to dynamically choose
or weight examples [Wang et al., 2024b, Jiao et al., 2025, Hu et al., 2025b], better tracking non-
stationary utility at the cost of tighter compute constraints. In contrast, our proposed framework takes
the dual perspective, where the training examples are used to regularize the admissible downstream
performance-driven updates, and unlocks a novel and broader design space.

2.2   Memory Saving Techniques in LLM Post-Training

Modern LLM training is typically under stringent computational constraints, especially memory
bottlenecks. Extensive research effort has therefore been devoted to parameter-efficient methods
and memory-saving scheduling techniques that allow post-training to fit within available hardware
budgets.
A common strategy restricts learning to a low-dimensional subspace. Low-Rank Adaptation
(LoRA) [Hu et al., 2022] injects trainable low-rank adapters into selected layers while keeping
the pretrained parameters frozen, significantly reducing memory and compute requirements [Han
et al., 2024, Renduchintala et al., 2024, Sheng et al., 2023, Zhang et al., 2023, Xia et al., 2024b,
Wang et al., 2023b, Dettmers et al., 2023]. Complementary to LoRA, Memory-efficient Subspace
Optimization (MeSO) methods [Zhao et al., 2024, Muhamed et al., 2024, He et al., 2025] instead
compress optimizer states and gradients by projecting them into a low-dimensional representation,
applying updates in that space, and mapping them back to the original parameter space for actual
parameter updates. We provide further details in Section A.
Complementary to low-dimensional subspace methods, memory-saving techniques restructure how
computation is scheduled to further lower peak memory. Activation checkpointing [Chen et al., 2016]
discards intermediate activations during the forward pass and recomputes them on-the-fly during the
backward pass, trading additional computation for reduced memory footprint. Another technique,
called gradient accumulation, is widely adopted in popular large-scale training frameworks [Rasley
et al., 2020, von Werra et al., 2020, Sheng et al., 2024], partitions a large batch into micro-batches
processed sequentially, accumulating gradients across micro-batches to simulate a larger effective
batch size at a fraction of the peak memory cost. Both techniques preserve the optimization trajectory
exactly and are widely composed with parameter-efficient methods in practice, making the resulting
memory management landscape particularly intricate for methods that introduce additional per-sample
computational dependencies beyond standard training.
In this work, we demonstrate that our proposed method integrates seamlessly with these techniques,
showing its compatibility with common post-training pipelines (Section 4.4).


3     Dr. Post-Training         : A Data Regularization Framework

We now introduce the Dr. Post-Training framework, which views general training data not as a pool
of examples to select from, but as a data regularizer for optimizing a target objective. We consider
a post-training setup (Section 3.1) with access to two data sources: abundant general training data
and limited target data. The framework is formulated through an iterative optimization procedure
(Section 3.2) where each step draws a training batch and a target batch from these two sources. The


                                                    3
target batch specifies the objective, while the training batch regularizes the optimization by defining
a feasible set of parameter update directions. Under this framework, standard training and existing
data selection methods arise as special cases through different definitions of the feasible set induced
by the training batch (Section 3.3.2). Moreover, the framework suggests a broader design space that
explicitly tunes the strength of data regularization, leading to a new family of methods (Section 3.3.3).
Next, we show that the methods within this framework lie on a spectrum with a bias–variance tradeoff
(Section 3.4). Finally, we conclude this section with a remark on how the proposed framework may
generalize to broader training paradigms (Section 3.5).

3.1     Problem Setup

Consider a post-training setup where a practitioner has access to two data distributions: a general
training distribution, from which abundant training data can be drawn, and a target distribution, for
which only limited data are available. The target distribution represents the downstream objective of
interest, while the general training distribution provides a broader but potentially misaligned source
of supervision. Our goal is to understand how to best leverage the abundant general training data to
improve performance on the target objective.
This setup arises naturally in several common post-training scenarios: (i) general-purpose SFT,
where a curated mixture of diverse tasks defines the training distribution and a specific downstream
benchmark serves as the target [Lambert et al., 2024, Grattafiori et al., 2024, Qwen Team, 2025],
(ii) domain-adaptive fine-tuning, where a broad general corpus supplements scarce domain-specific
data [Gururangan et al., 2020], and (iii) targeted instruction tuning, where representative examples
from the target task guide selection from a large instruction corpus [Xia et al., 2024a, He et al., 2024,
Wang et al., 2024b].

Notation. We now introduce the necessary notation to formalize this setup. Let ℓ(θ; z) be a
differentiable loss function over model parameters θ ∈ Rd and a data sample z. Let the target
distribution be P⋆ , the corresponding population loss and the gradient are then defined as L⋆ (θ) :=
Ez∼P⋆ [ℓ(θ; z)] and g⋆ (θ) := ∇θ L⋆ (θ) ∈ Rd . Similarly, for the general training distribution Ptr , we
define gtr (θ) := ∇θ Ltr (θ) such that Ltr (θ) := Ez∼Ptr [ℓ(θ; z)].

3.2     The Data-Regularization Framework for Post-Training

We now formalize the central asymmetry in our setting: the target data determine what objective
should be optimized, while the general training data determine how the update is allowed to move.
Our framework adopts an iterative optimization view in which, at each step, the update direction is
chosen to improve the target objective, but only from a set of directions induced by the training batch.
In this way, the training data act as a data regularizer: they do not specify the target objective itself,
but instead constrain the admissible target-driven updates.

3.2.1    Framework
Target-driven one-step update. Modern post-training is carried out by iterative optimization [Wei
et al., 2022, Schulman et al., 2017, Ouyang et al., 2022, Shao et al., 2024], where at step t, the model
parameters θt is updated via
                                         θt+1 = θt − ηt ut ,
where ηt > 0 is the step size and ut ∈ Rd is the update direction. Since the target objective is the
ultimate quantity of interest, we adopt a one-step target-driven view and choose the update direction
to minimize the next-step target loss within a prescribed feasible set Ut :
                                     ut = arg min L⋆ (θt − ηt u).                                       (1)
                                                 u∈Ut

The role of the feasible set is central: it determines which update directions are allowed at step t.

Training-batch-induced feasible set.       At each step, we draw two batches:
                                        i.i.d.                            i.i.d.
                        Bt = {zi }ni=1 ∼ Ptr ,              Bt⋆ = {zj⋆ }m
                                                                        j=1 ∼ P⋆ .


                                                        4
The training batch Bt is used to construct the feasible set Ut , while the target batch Bt⋆ is used to
evaluate which direction in Ut best decreases the target loss L⋆ .
                                                                                       1
                                                                                          P
More concretely, for any set of data B, let gB (θt ) denotes the batch gradient |B|           z∈B ∇θ ℓ(θt ; z),
and for convenience, we further write
            gi (θt ) := g{zi } (θt ) = ∇θ ℓ(θt ; zi ), gj⋆ (θt ) := g{zj⋆ } (θt ) = ∇θ ℓ(θt ; zj⋆ )
denote the per-sample gradients from the training and target batches, respectively, and define
                                        n                                         m
                                     1X                                        1 X ⋆
           ĝtr (θt ) := gBt (θt ) =       gi (θt ), ĝ⋆ (θt ) := gBt⋆ (θt ) =      g (θt ).
                                     n i=1                                     m j=1 j
We fix a step t and omit writing θt when it is clear from the context hereafter, e.g., gi , gj⋆ , ĝtr , ĝ⋆ , and
also the population gradients g⋆ := g⋆ (θt ) and gtr := gtr (θt ).
The key modeling choice in our framework is that Ut depends only on the training batch Bt , typically
through the collection of training gradients {gi }ni=1 , whereas the target batch Bt⋆ enters only through
the target objective via information such as ĝ⋆ , as we will soon see. This separation makes explicit the
distinct roles of the two data sources: the target batch identifies the desired direction of improvement,
while the training batch constrains which directions are admissible.

3.2.2    The Dual Perspective of Data Selection and Data Regularization
The formulation above admits a dual perspective of data selection and data regularization, as
illustrated in Figure 1.

Question:                                           Bt⋆
                                                                                                       u t θt+1
      Given Target and General Data                                       , how to update model θt                  ?
                                                                Bt
Data Selection View                                              Data Regularization View
             g   closer                             θt+1                                                    θt+1
                               ut = g                                             ut = ProjUt (ĝ⋆ )
                      ĝ⋆                                 ĝ⋆             Ut                                  ĝ⋆
         g                                     θt                                                      θt

                  Select S “closest” to Bt⋆                                Regularize ĝ⋆ with Bt via Ut

                          Figure 1: The dual view of data selection and data regularization.

The conventional data selection view. The target objective determines which training examples
are most useful, and the update is formed from those selected examples. This is the perspective taken
by most existing data selection methods [Xia et al., 2024a, He et al., 2024, Wang et al., 2024b].

The novel data regularization view. The target objective specifies the ideal direction of improve-
ment, while the training batch regularizes this update by restricting it to lie in the feasible set Ut .
Without such a regularization, one would attempt to optimize the target objective directly, but this can
be statistically unstable when target data are scarce. Constraining the update to directions supported
by the training batch can reduce this instability, at the price of introducing approximation bias when
the training and target distributions are misaligned.
This viewpoint suggests that the complexity of the feasible set controls a bias–variance tradeoff. A
smaller feasible set imposes stronger regularization: it stabilizes optimization but may bias the update
away from the ideal target direction. A larger feasible set weakens this regularization: it allows more
faithful target-driven updates, but may incur higher statistical variance. We formalize this tradeoff in
Section 3.4 after introducing some concrete instantiations of the feasible sets below.

3.3     Concrete Instantiations of the Feasible Sets

We next turn the framework into concrete methods. We begin by deriving a tractable approximation of
the optimization problem in Eq.(1) (Section 3.3.1). With this approximation, several existing methods


                                                                5
arise as special cases by specifying how the training batch induces the feasible set Ut (Section 3.3.2).
We then use this perspective to motivate a broader design space of data regularizer via group-wise
decomposition (Section 3.3.3).

3.3.1   A Tractable Approximation of Eq.(1)
We first derive a tractable approximation of the optimization problem in Eq.(1). For arbitrary feasible
set, the constrained optimization for L⋆ (θt − ηt u) over u ∈ Ut is generally difficult, especially
when Ut is discrete. We therefore apply the majorization–minimization principle [Lange et al., 2000,
Mairal, 2013, Lange, 2016] with a standard smoothness assumption [Bottou et al., 2018, Nesterov,
2013].
Assumption 1 (Target smoothness). The target population loss L⋆ is β-smooth for some β > 0.

Under Assumption 1, the target loss admits the following quadratic majorization upper bound:
                                                                    βηt2
                          L⋆ (θt − ηt u) ≤ L⋆ (θt ) − ηt ⟨g⋆ , u⟩ +      ∥u∥2 ,                     (2)
                                                                      2
where L⋆ (θt ) is independent of u and the population gradient g⋆ is unknown. Hence, minimizing this
over u ∈ Ut and substituting the target batch gradient estimate ĝ⋆ for the unknown population gradient
g⋆ yields a Euclidean projection ut = ProjUt (ĝ⋆ ), or equivalently (see derivation in Section B.1):
                                       ut = arg min∥u − ĝ⋆ ∥2 ,                                       (3)
                                               u∈Ut

We are now ready to show how different design choices of the feasible set correspond to different
methods.

3.3.2   Existing Methods as Special Cases
We now show how several existing training paradigms can be viewed as special cases of our frame-
work. For ease of exposition, we refer to these instantiations as the Target-Only Update, the
Full-Training Update, and the Global Subset Update.

Target-Only Update. The least regularized instantiation ignores the training batch when con-
structing the feasible set and allows the update to move in any direction in parameter space. This
corresponds to choosing Ut⋆ := Rd . Because there is no directional constraint, Eq.(3) gives ut = ĝ⋆ .
Thus, the Target-Only Update recovers gradient descent on the target batch Bt⋆ , completely ignoring
the training batch Bt . In practice, this corresponds to fine-tuning exclusively on high-quality, task-
specific data [Zhou et al., 2023, Gunasekar et al., 2023]. The resulting update is unbiased for g⋆ , but
it can have high variance when the target batch size m is small.

Full-Training Update. At the opposite extreme, the strongest regularization is obtained by allowing
only the aggregate training-batch gradient as the update direction. This corresponds to the singleton
feasible set Uttr := {ĝtr }. In this case, Eq. (3) trivially gives ut = ĝtr . The Full-Training Update
recovers standard gradient descent on the general training distribution, as in general-purpose SFT,
where the model is trained on a curated mixture without per-step target feedback [Lambert et al.,
2024, Grattafiori et al., 2024]. Here, the training batch imposes the strongest possible constraint on
the update direction, eliminating any per-step dependence on the target batch.

Global Subset Update. Between these two extremes, existing data selection methods can be
expressed by allowing the update to be the average gradient of a selected subset of training samples.
For a subset size k, define Utglob (k) := {gS = k1 i∈S gi : S ⊆ [n], |S| = k}. This feasible set
                                                     P
contains all k-sample averages of training gradients from Bt . Under Eq.(3), the resulting update is
obtained by choosing St ∈ arg minS⊆[n],|S|=k ∥gS − ĝ⋆ ∥2 , and then setting ut = gSt . We refer to
this instantiation as the Global Subset Update, since a single subset S is shared across all parameters,
in contrast to the Group-Wise Subset Update to be introduced next in Section 3.3.3.
The Global Subset Update interpolates between the target-only and Full-Training Updates. Its feasible
set Utglob (k) is richer than the singleton feasible set Uttr = {ĝtr }, but remains more restrictive than
the unconstrained feasible set Ut⋆ = Rd . However, solving for S is a combinatorial optimization


                                                    6
problem over training subsets. Expanding the objective and dropping the term independent of S,
the subset optimization is equivalent to minimizing   ∥gS ∥2 − 2⟨gS , ĝ⋆ ⟩. Thus, the objective balances
                                             2
                                               P
a first-order alignment term, 2⟨gS , ĝ⋆ ⟩ = k i∈S ⟨gi , ĝ⋆ ⟩, which favors samples aligned with the
target gradient, against a second-order redundancy penalty, ∥gS ∥2 = k12 i,i′ ∈S ⟨gi , gi′ ⟩, which
                                                                                P
discourages selecting highly correlated training gradients. The alignment term decomposes into
independent per-sample scores
                                             si := ⟨gi , ĝ⋆ ⟩,
whereas the redundancy penalty couples all samples in S, making exact optimization intractable.
Existing data selection methods can therefore be viewed as tractable approximations to this subset
optimization problem:

• Top-k. Choose the k samples with the largest scores si , ignoring the redundancy penalty. This is
  the cheapest strategy and is effective when samples are not highly correlated [Han and Tsvetkov,
  2021, Hu et al., 2024, He et al., 2024].
• Thresholding. Keep all samples whose score exceeds a fixed threshold, yielding a variable-size
  subset [Hu et al., 2025b]. This can be viewed as a variable-cardinality relaxation of the fixed-k
  feasible set, and it also ignores the redundancy penalty.
• Greedy construction. Iteratively construct St by adding the sample that most improves the
  full objective, thereby accounting for redundancy at each step [Wang et al., 2024b]. This better
  approximates the projection problem, but incurs an additional O(nk) selection cost.

3.3.3   New Data-Regularization Designs via Group-Wise Decomposition
The three instantiations above are only a few points in the broader space of feasible-set designs. In
principle, Eq. (3) allows many possible choices of Ut ⊆ Rd as long as it is independent of target
data; our focus here is the ones that actually depend on training data. We introduce a new family
of data regularizers: feasible sets constructed from the training batch that are more flexible than
Global Subset Update, while still restricting target-driven updates to directions supported by training
samples.
The motivation is to relax the global coupling imposed by Utglob (k), where a single subset S of
training samples must be shared across all parameter coordinates. This can be overly restrictive
when different parameter groups align with the target signal in different ways. For example, a
training sample that provides a useful update for one layer or module may be less informative for
another. Thus, rather than selecting one global subset for the entire model, we partition the parameter
coordinates into groups and allow each group to choose its own subset of training samples. This gives
a controlled relaxation of the feasible set: it weakens the data regularization imposed by the Global
Subset Update, while avoiding the fully unconstrained Target-Only Update.

Group-Wise Subset Update. Let G = {Gp }P       p=1 be a partition of the parameter indices [d] into P
                                     d       (p)
disjoint groups. For any vector v ∈ R , let v denote the subvector indexed by Gp . In particular,
 (p)       (p)
gi and ĝ⋆ denote the corresponding subvectors of gi and ĝ⋆ .
For a fixed subset size k, define the group-wise feasible set as
                              n                                                           o
                                                                    (p)
              Utgrp (k; G) := u = (u(1) , . . . , u(P ) ) : u(p) ∈ Ut (k) for all p ∈ [P ] ,

where                                                           
                         (p)
                                 
                                   (p)  1 X  (p)
                                                                 
                        Ut (k) := gS :=     gi : S ⊆ [n], |S| = k .
                                       k                        
                                                  i∈S

In other words, each parameter group Gp is allowed to choose its own subset St,p of training samples.
We refer to this instantiation as the Group-Wise Subset Update. A practically important special case
is the Layer-Wise Subset Update, where each group corresponds to the parameters of a single layer.
The Global Subset Update is recovered as the special case in which all groups share the same subset,
                                           St,1 = · · · = St,P .


                                                    7
Therefore,
                                        Utglob (k) ⊆ Utgrp (k; G),
with the inclusion typically being strict for nontrivial partitions. Thus, the Group-Wise Subset
Update enlarges the feasible set relative to the Global Subset Update. From the data-regularization
perspective, this reduces the strength of the regularization imposed by requiring a single global subset,
and can reduce approximation bias when that global constraint is too restrictive.
This construction also preserves a useful separability structure. Because the group-wise feasible set
                                                    QP       (p)
factorizes across parameter groups, Utgrp (k; G) = p=1 Ut (k), the projection problem in Eq.(3)
decomposes into independent per-group problems:
                                                   P
                                                                                         (p)
                                                   X
                          min
                          grp
                                  ∥u − ĝ⋆ ∥2 =                  min           ∥u(p) − ĝ⋆ ∥2 .
                      u∈Ut   (k;G)                         (p)     (p)
                                                      p=1 u ∈Ut          (k)

Equivalently, for each group p, we choose
                                                                                 2
                                                             (p)          (p)
                                  St,p ∈ arg min            gS − ĝ⋆                 ,
                                            S⊆[n],|S|=k

and set
                                      (p)       (p)        1 X (p)
                                     ut     = gSt,p =          gi .
                                                           k
                                                             i∈St,p
Thus, the same approximation strategies used for the Global Subset Update can be applied indepen-
dently within each parameter group. For example, the group-wise top-k rule scores each training
sample by
                                         (p)      (p) (p)
                                        si := ⟨gi , ĝ⋆ ⟩
and selects the k samples with the largest scores separately for each group Gp . Thresholding and
greedy construction can be adapted analogously.
The partition G, therefore, becomes a new design knob. Coarser partitions impose stronger data
regularization by forcing larger portions of the model to share the same subset, while finer partitions
allow more flexible target-driven updates. This produces a spectrum of feasible sets between the
Global Subset Update and the Target-Only Update, which we analyze through the bias–variance
tradeoff in Section 3.4.

3.4     Bias–Variance Tradeoffs

We now formalize the bias–variance tradeoff induced by different choices of the feasible set. From
the data-regularization perspective, the feasible set Ut controls the strength of regularization imposed
by the training batch. This is analogous to the classical bias–variance tradeoff in statistical estima-
tion [Hastie et al., 2009], but here the relevant complexity is the complexity of the data-induced
feasible set rather than the model class.

3.4.1     Data-Regularization Spectrum
The feasible sets introduced above can be organized by their expressiveness. For a fixed subset size k
and partition G, we have
                                Utglob (k) ⊆ Utgrp (k; G) ⊆ Ut⋆ = Rd .
The first inclusion follows because the Global Subset Update is the special case of the Group-
Wise Subset Update in which all parameter groups share the same subset. The second inclusion is
immediate because all feasible-set designs are subsets of the unconstrained target-only feasible set.
In addition, the Full-Training Update is recovered from the Global Subset Update when k = n, since
                                                          
                                               1 X   n    
                                  Utglob (n) =           gi = Uttr .
                                               n          
                                                           i=1

Thus, by varying the subset size k and the partition G, the proposed framework induces a data-
regularization spectrum (Figure 2): moving toward larger feasible sets weakens the regularization
imposed by the training batch, reducing approximation bias but increasing statistical variance.


                                                       8
              Target-Only Ut⋆   Group-Wise Subset Utgrp       Global Subset Utglob   Full-Training Uttr
     bias ↓                                                                                               ↑ bias
 variance ↑                                                                                               ↓ variance
                                         stronger data regularization −→


Figure 2: Data regularization spectrum. Different methods correspond to feasible sets of increasing
expressiveness (left to right), trading approximation bias for statistical variance.


In particular, Group-Wise Subset Update provides a richer family of data regularizers than the Global
Subset Update, allowing a broader design space with different bias–variance tradeoffs.

3.4.2     Formal Characterization of the Tradeoff
We now formalize the bias–variance tradeoff in terms of one-step progress on the target loss. Recall
from Eq.(2) that the decrease in target loss is controlled by how well the update direction approximates
the target population gradient g⋆ . We measure this error by the conditional mean squared error (MSE)
                                                     h             i
                                    MSE(u) := E ∥u − g⋆ ∥2 θt ,

where the expectation is over the randomness in the training batch Bt and the target batch Bt⋆ sampled
at step t. Under this convention, g⋆ = g⋆ (θt ) is fixed, while Ut , ĝtr , ĝ⋆ , and the resulting update ut
are random variables. Formally, we have the following:
Lemma 3.1. Assume Assumption 1. Fix θt and let 0 < ηt ≤ 1/β. For any u with E[∥u∥2 | θt ] < ∞,
                                                 ηt         ηt
                  E L⋆ (θt+1 ) | θt ≤ L⋆ (θt ) − ∥g⋆ ∥2 + MSE(u).
                                  
                                                  2         2

We note that Lemma 3.1 holds for any u, and the proof can be found in Section B.2. Now, given a
data-induced feasible set Ut , define its approximation bias term as
                                                                 
                                                               2
                                   B(Ut ) := E inf ∥u − g⋆ ∥ θt .
                                                    u∈Ut

This quantity measures the best target-gradient approximation achievable within the feasible set,
averaged over the randomness in the training batch that constructs Ut . For the projected update ut
obtained from Eq.(3), we define the remaining variance component as
                                       V(ut ) := MSE(ut ) − B(Ut ),
so that
                                        MSE(ut ) = B(Ut ) + V(ut ).                                               (4)
The first term captures the “bias” of restricting updates to Ut , while the second term captures the
“variance” of choosing an update from Ut using finite-sample target information.
Remark 3.2 (Comparison to Classical Bias and Variance Definitions). The decomposition in Eq.(4)
is adapted to the feasible-set view and is therefore slightly different from the classical bias–variance
decomposition of an estimator. Here, B(Ut ) measures the approximation error induced by the
feasible set itself, including any randomness in the training-batch-induced feasible set. The variance
component V(ut ) measures the additional error incurred when the update is chosen from Ut using
the noisy target-batch estimate ĝ⋆ .

We are now ready to state our results about the bias and variance of each method. First, we characterize
the exact bias–variance decomposition of the Full-Training and Target-Only Updates. For notational
convenience, define Σtr := Cov(gi | θt ) and Σ⋆ := Cov(gj⋆ | θt ).
Proposition 3.3 (Bias–variance tradeoffs). Fix θt and let ηt = 1/β. Then:

  (i) Full-Training Update. For Uttr = {ĝtr },
                                                              tr(Σtr )
                                B(Uttr ) = ∥gtr − g⋆ ∥2 +              ,     V(utr
                                                                                t ) = 0.
                                                                 n

                                                          9
 (ii) Target-Only Update. For Ut⋆ = Rd ,
                                                                     tr(Σ⋆ )
                                     B(Ut⋆ ) = 0,        V(u⋆t ) =           .
                                                                       m
The proof is deferred to Section B.2. Proposition 3.3 states that the bias of Full-Training Update
shrinks as n grows but has an irreducible floor ∥gtr − g⋆ ∥2 due to the intrinsic distribution-mismatch
error between the general training distribution Ptr and the target distribution P⋆ . On the other
hand, Target-Only Update achieves zero bias as expected. In contrast, Full-Training Update has
zero variance since it does not depend on the target batch, while Target-Only Update has variance
tr(Σ⋆ )/m, which can be large when the target batch size m is small.
Next, we provide explicit variance bounds and bias characterization between Global Subset and
Group-Wise Subset Updates. For this, we additionally assume bounded training gradients to control
the complexity of the finite feasible sets [Shalev-Shwartz and Ben-David, 2014, Hazan, 2016], and
also a standard sub-Gaussian noise assumption [Lan, 2020, Liu et al., 2023]:
Assumption 2 (Bounded gradients). There exists C > 0 such that ∥gi ∥ ≤ C for all i ∈ [n].
Assumption 3√(Sub-Gaussian noise). Noise of target gradient ξ := ĝ⋆ − g⋆ is sub-Gaussian with
parameter σ/ m for some σ > 0.
Theorem 3.4 (Bias–variance tradeoffs). Assume Assumptions 2 and 3 and fix θt and let ηt = 1/β.
Then for any k ∈ [n]:

  (i) Global Subset Update. For Utglob (k),
                                                             r
                                                   4Cσ                 
                                    V(uglob
                                       t    (k)) ≤ √             2 log 2 nk .
                                                         m

 (ii) Group-Wise Subset Update. For Utgrp (k; G) where G = {Gp }Pp=1 contains P groups,
                                                      r
                                               4CP σ           
                            V(ugrp
                                 t  (k; G)) ≤    √      2 log  2 nk .
                                                   m

Moreover, Global Subset Update has a higher bias compared to Group-Wise Subset Update:
                                   B(Utgrp (k; G)) ≤ B(Utglob (k)).

Figure 3 illustrates the decomposition of Theorem 3.4. The proof
is again deferred to Section B.2, where we show in the proof that                             B
the variance is controlled by E[supu∈Utgrp (k;G) |⟨ξ, u⟩| | θt ], which
is in turn upper-bounded by a complexity term that depends on the
logarithmic size of the feasible set.                                                 MSE          ξ
                                                                                 Ut
In terms of bias, we note that B(Utgrp (k; G)) ≤ B(Utglob (k)) is
simply due to Utglob (k) ⊆ Utgrp (k; G). More generally, for two                ut          ĝ⋆
groups G, G ′ where G ′ is a finer partition of G, we have Utgrp (k; G) ⊆
Utgrp (k; G ′ ), and hence B(Utgrp (k; G ′ )) ≤ B(Utgrp (k; G)). On the                 g⋆
other hand, for any two k ̸= k ′ , it is almost always the case that
no inclusion relation exists between Utglob (k) and Utglob (k ′ ) (or
Utgrp (k; G) and Utgrp (k ′ ; G)), and hence it is generally difficult to
                                                                          Figure 3: Bias–variance de-
compare the bias for different k. However, the same intuition still
                                                                          composition for a chosen Ut
holds: the larger the feasible is, the lower the bias might be. For
instance, when k = n, we have Uttr = Utglob (n) = Utgrp (n; G),
degenerating to the singleton set; when k = n/2, the feasible set Utglob (k) has n/2n
                                                                                       
                                                                                         candidates for
approximating g⋆ , boosting the chance of approximating g⋆ better and hence achieving a lower bias.

Summary. Among all the methods, Full-Training Update imposes the strongest data regularization:
it is stable, but may incur substantial bias when the training and target distributions are misaligned.
Target-Only Update imposes no data regularization: it is unbiased for the target gradient, but can be


                                                    10
unstable when m is small. Global Subset Update interpolates these two, offering a new bias–variance
tradeoff, and group-wise decomposition further reduces approximation bias by relaxing the global
subset constraint, offering a spectrum over bias–variance tradeoffs with different choices of group
partition.

 Takeaway: Larger feasible sets reduce bias but increase variance, since the update has more
 freedom to align both with g⋆ and also with noise ξ. Full-Training is stable but biased; Target-Only
 is unbiased but unstable when m is small; Global and Group-Wise Subset Updates interpolate
 between them, with the partition G and subset size k providing additional design knobs.

3.5    Generalization Beyond Two-Distribution Setting

Although we developed the framework in the two-distribution setting above, the underlying principle
is more general. At its core, the data regularization principle rests on the following structure:
       (i) Training signal that can be optimized reliably but might introduce bias, and
      (ii) Target signal that is too noisy or costly to optimize directly.
In the two-distribution setting, the target batch provides the noisy signal for optimizing the target
objective, while the training batch induces the feasible set that stabilizes the update.
Other common post-training paradigms also admit this structure: for instance, in reinforcement
learning, the target signal of interest is the expected reward, but directly optimizing it via policy
gradient is high-variance. Training signals such as PPO’s clipped loss [Schulman et al., 2017] or
GRPO’s group-relative estimator [Shao et al., 2024], on the other hand, stabilize training at the cost
of optimization bias. We demonstrate and apply these principles in the experiments (Sections 5.2
and 5.3).

4     Efficient Realization of Dr. Post-Training Under Memory Constraints
Modern LLM training infrastructures are heavily constrained by memory bottlenecks. Efficiently
realizing the proposed method under such tight memory limits, therefore, requires nontrivial system-
level optimizations. In this section, we discuss the optimizations that make Dr. Post-Training practical
and compatible with modern infrastructures.
Specifically, we will start by revisiting the memory footprint of standard training (Section 4.1) that
grounds the later discussions in three aspects. First, in Section 4.2, we address the computational
overhead of data-regularized updates with a carefully designed tensor lifetime schedule that can
efficiently reuse the intermediate variables in standard forward and backward passes with negligible
additional memory cost. Second, in Section 4.3, we investigate the computational costs of the key
per-sample scoring step incurred by the data-regularized updates, develop several implementations
with different compute–memory trade-offs, and identify the most efficient choice for different
regimes. Third, in Section 4.4, we show that the resulting design remains compatible with modern
memory-saving training techniques such as LoRA, MeSO, activation checkpointing, and gradient
accumulation.
Overall, this section shows that Dr. Post-Training is not only algorithmically appealing, but can also
be implemented efficiently under the memory constraints that dominate modern post-training.

4.1    Preliminary: Memory Footprint in Standard Training

Here, we provide a quick overview of the memory footprint in a standard training step that consists of
a forward and a backward pass, where we simplify the transformer model into a stack of L MLP linear
                                                                                 (1)          (L)
layers for discussion convenience.2 Let the model with d total parameters θt = (θt , . . . , θt ) ∈ Rd ,
                  (l)                                                   p
with each layer θt having d/L parameters and activations of dimension d/L for simplicity. We use
    2 Throughout this section, “layer” refers to an individual linear module (e.g., nn.Linear in PyTorch), not a full transformer

block. A single transformer block contains multiple linear modules (query, key, value, output projections, and MLP layers).
Data regularization targets these linear modules, which account for the vast majority of transformer parameters; the treatment
of embedding layers and other non-linear modules is discussed in Section C.6.


                                                              11
                                                            √       √
                       (l)                          (l)
both the vector form θt ∈ Rd/L and the matrix form Wt ∈ R d/L× d/L interchangeably,
                                                                           √     √ related
      (l)          (l)                                                 (l)   d/L× d/L
by θt = vec(Wt ); the same applies to weight gradients in matrix form G ∈ R           with
g (l) = vec(G(l) ).

4.1.1    Forward and Backward Pass
Given a training batch Bt = {zi }ni=1 of sequencesPof   length T , a standard training step first performs
                                                     n
a forward pass to evaluate the batch loss ℓ := i=1 ℓi with ℓi := ℓ(θt ; zi ), caching intermediate
                                                                                 (1)       (L)
activations, then a backward pass to compute the batch gradient ĝtr = (ĝtr , . . . , ĝtr ). Figure 4
illustrates both passes at a single layer l along with the resulting memory footprint. For simplicity,
we omit the dimension of sequence length in the illustration.

 Forward l                              Backward l                           Gradient l           Backward l−1
                                     ...
                                      ...     σ′                                                         σ′
                               σ
                                           θ(l)             ∂ℓ/∂e(l)   ∂ℓ/∂a(l)            (l)                 ∂ℓ/∂e(l−1)
            a(l)     e(l)                                                                 ĝtr
     a(l)
      (l)
     e                                            ...
    ∂ℓ/∂e(l)
    ∂ℓ/∂a(l)




Figure 4: Top. Forward pass and backward pass (activation and weight gradient) computation graph:
both −→ and 99K denote computational dependency; 99K indicates that the dependency runs across
the boundary between forward and backward. Bottom. Memory footprint: a tensor can be released
once no remaining operation depends on it.


                                                                                                  (l)             (l) (l)
Forward pass.     Each layer l computes the output (pre-activation) of the layer ei,τ = Wt ai,τ
                                  √
                           (l)
from the input activation ai,τ ∈ R d/L for each sample i ∈ [n] and token τ ∈ [T ], then applies
                             (l+1)                (l)
an activation function σ: ai,τ = σ(ei,τ ). In practice, all nT vectors are batched as columns of
an activation matrix, so each layer reduces to a single matrix multiplication. All activations and
                  (l) (l)
pre-activations {ai,τ , ei,τ }i,τ are cached for later use.

Backward pass. The activation gradient propagates backward layer by layer. At layer l, the
                             (l)
pre-activation gradient ∂ℓ/∂ei,τ arrives for each sample i and token τ . The activation gradient propa-
                                   (l−1)                (l−1)          (l)                  (l)         (l)⊤          (l)
gates to layer l − 1 via ∂ℓ/∂ei,τ = σ ′ (ei,τ ) ⊙ ∂ℓ/∂ai,τ where ∂ℓ/∂ai,τ = Wt ∂ℓ/∂ei,τ
and ⊙ denotes the element-wise product. The batch weight gradient is then computed as
  (l)      Pn PT                (l)     (l)
ĝtr = n1 i=1 τ =1 (∂ℓ/∂ei,τ ) ⊗ ai,τ ∈ Rd/L , where ⊗ denotes the Kronecker product. For
                                                               (l)   PT            (l)     (l)
later reference, we write the per-sample weight gradient as gi := τ =1 (∂ℓ/∂ei,τ ) ⊗ ai,τ , so that
  (l)        n    (l)
ĝtr = n1 i=1 gi . In practice, however, standard backpropagation does not explicitly form each
          P
  (l)
gi . Instead, it stacks all token-level activations and pre-activation gradients across the batch and
evaluates the above double sum with a single batched matrix multiplication, which directly returns
                                    (l)
the aggregated batch gradient ĝtr . Thus, standard training computes the batch gradient without
materializing separate per-sample weight gradients in memory.

4.1.2    Memory Footprint of Key Tensors during Training
During each step of the standard training update, a tensor can be released as soon as no remaining
computation depends on it. As the goal is to compute ĝtr , a key observation is that during backward
                                                                                       (l)
pass at layer l − 1, both a(l) and ∂ℓ/∂e(l) become free once the batch gradient ĝtr is assembled
(Figure 4). Moreover, ∂ℓ/∂e(l+1) is released before ∂ℓ/∂e(l) is allocated, so its buffer is reused and
the memory footprint of pre-activation gradients remains constant across layers.


                                                            12
    Algorithm 4.1 presents the pseudocode of one standard training step with memory management,
                                                                                           (l) (l)
    which recovers the Full-Training Update. For simplicity, we hide the computation of ai , ei , their
    gradient, and also their dependency on each other in the backward function call. The creation and
    release of key tensors of interest are annotated with memory cost (+ allocation, − release) to be
    compared with later algorithms. We note that when the training data is Bt⋆ instead of Bt , we recover
    Target-Only Update.

    Algorithm 4.1: Standard Training Update
    Data: Model θt , training data {zi }ni=1 , learning rate ηt
    Result: Updated model parameters θt+1
          (l) (l)                                                               √
1  (ℓ, {ai , ei }l,i )←Forward(θt , {zi }ni=1 )                      // +O(2nT dL)
                 d
 2 ut ← 0 ∈ R                                                              // +O(d)
 3 for l = L, . . . , 1 do
                              (l)                  (l)
 4      /* Allocate {∂ℓ/∂ei }ni=1 , release {ei }ni=1 ; memory remains constant   */
                (l) n                    (l)                     p            p
 5      {∂ℓ/∂ei }i=1 ←Backward(ℓ, θt )                  // +O(nT d/L) − O(nT d/L)
         (l)     1
                   Pn PT             (l)       (l)
 6      ut ← n i=1 τ =1 (∂ℓ/∂ei,τ ) ⊗ ai,τ
                      (l)   (l)                                               p
 7      Release(ai , ∂ℓ/∂ei ) for all i ∈ [n]                       // −O(2nT d/L)
 8 θt+1 ← θt − ηt ut
 9 Release(ut )                                                            // −O(d)
10 return θt+1




    4.2     Customized Tensor Lifetime Scheduling for Efficient Data-Regularized Update

    We now turn to a main system challenge introduced by the additional computational dependencies in
    data-regularized updates. Recall that, unlike standard training, our method must first determine the
    final update direction by solving a subset-selection problem based on per-sample scores, and only
    then assemble the corresponding gradient update. This creates additional computational dependencies
    on intermediate per-sample quantities that are not preserved in standard backpropagation.

    Naive implementations. A naive implementation is a two-pass approach: use one forward-
    backward pass to compute the per-sample scores and determine the selected subset, and then run
    a second forward-backward pass to compute the final gradient update using only the selected sub-
    set3 . This approach is simple and memory-efficient because each pass follows the standard training
    schedule, but it substantially increases runtime by effectively duplicating the backward computation.
    Another naive implementation is a retain-graph approach: retain the computation graph (e.g., by
    calling retain_graph=True in PyTorch) during backpropagation and keep all intermediate tensors
    alive so that the same computation graph can be reused for both scoring and gradient assembly. While
    this avoids the second pass, it is impractical at LLM scale, since retaining the full graph together with
    the per-sample quantities needed by our method leads to prohibitive memory overhead.

    4.2.1    Customized Tensor Lifetime Scheduling
    We develop a customized tensor lifetime scheduling to obtain the data-regularized gradient update
    within one pass while avoiding significant memory overhead.
    For convenience, we consider layer-aligned partition in the rest of the discussion, where each group
    contains one or more layers. We direct interested readers to Section C.1 for a discussion on general
    partitions, where each group might contain partial parameters of a layer.

    A starting trick: merging training and target batch. We start by addressing a problem that the
    training gradients and target gradients are typically calculated in separate passes, which prevents
    effective tensor lifetime scheduling in one pass. We address this problem by realizing that these
       3 For example, an existing online data selection method [Wang et al., 2024b] adopts a two-pass implementation. See their

    implementation in https://github.com/Jiachen-T-Wang/GREATS/ and an in-depth discussion in Section C.2.


                                                               13
gradients can be obtained from a merged batch with both training and target samples. Specifically,
suppose a training step uses a training batch Bt = {zi }ni=1 and a target batch Bt⋆ = {zj⋆ }m
                                                                                            j=1 . Rather
than processing them in separate passes, we concatenate them into one batch of size N = n + m and
define the merged loss
                                        Xn                m
                                                          X
                                   ℓ :=     ℓ(θt ; zi ) +   ℓ(θt ; zj⋆ ).
                                          i=1              j=1
Because different samples do not share activations, a single forward-backward pass on this merged
loss produces all per-sample backward signals for both the training samples and the target samples.
From these, we can extract the quantities needed for constructing the data-regularized update direction.
                                                                                        Pn           Pm
Remark 4.1. Doing forward and backward pass on the merged-batch loss ℓ := i=1 ℓi + j=1 ℓ⋆j
is an existing trick in the literature [Pandya et al., 2025, Wang et al., 2024b]. We note that this extends
to non-loss-gradient target signals for an arbitrary θt -differentiable f ({zj⋆ }m    j=1 ; θt ) (Section 3.2):
                                                   Pn
backward pass on the merged batch with ℓ := i=1 ℓi + f ({zj⋆ }m       j=1 t; θ ) yields both the per-sample
training gradients and the target gradient ∇θ f in a single pass; however, when f depends on the
training samples zi , the gradient information is mixed and separate passes are required.

The computational dependencies in data-regularized update. Next, given the merged batch
where we can obtain the per-sample quantities from one pass, we carefully examine the computational
dependencies for obtaining the data-regularized updates. For both Global Subset Update and Group-
Wise Subset Update, the algorithm can be decomposed into three parts:
1. Scoring: compute the score of each training sample against the target signal (at group level);
2. Subset selection: determine the selected subset St (or St,p for each group Gp );
3. Update assembly: assemble the final update direction by averaging the gradients over the selected
   subset.
The key issue is that both scoring and update assembly depend on per-sample quantities, while
standard training only materializes the aggregated batch gradient ĝtr . In particular, the per-sample
          (l)    PT            (l)        (l)
gradient gi = τ =1 (∂ℓ/∂ei,τ ) ⊗ ai,τ is never explicitly stored in standard backpropagation. Yet
for our method, it enters twice: first in the score computation, and later in the assembly of the selected
subset. This is exactly the source of the extra dependencies that need to be handled.
A crucial observation is that both scoring and update assembly ultimately depend on the same local
information at each layer, namely the pair (a(l) , ∂ℓ/∂e(l) ). Once this pair is available, one can either
                                                        (l)
materialize the corresponding per-sample gradients gi explicitly, or compute the required scores
and selected averages directly from it. This suggests that the fundamental scheduling question is
not whether to preserve the entire computation graph, but rather how to retain this minimal local
information long enough for all downstream computations to be completed.

Tensor lifetime scheduling. Given the computational dependencies, we now introduce the proposed
tensor lifetime scheduling.
The key idea is to swap the forward-cached tensor e(l) with the backward-generated tensor ∂ℓ/∂e(l)
at each layer. Recall from Section 4.1 that in standard training the forward pass caches (a(l) , e(l) ),
and during backward, e(l) is consumed to produce ∂ℓ/∂e(l) . After this point, e(l) is no longer needed.
Therefore, instead of releasing everything immediately after the layer gradient is computed, we
retain the pair (a(l) , ∂ℓ/∂e(l) ) for later scoring and update assembly, while discarding e(l) . Since
∂ℓ/∂e(l) has the same shape as e(l) , this replacement preserves the per-layer memory footprint up to
lower-order bookkeeping costs.
Applying this swap iteratively across layers yields a one-pass schedule with the following structure:

1. run one forward pass on the merged batch and cache (a(l) , e(l) ) as in standard training;
2. during backward, replace each cached e(l) with ∂ℓ/∂e(l) , so that after the backward pass the
   retained tensors are (a(l) , ∂ℓ/∂e(l) ) for all layers;
3. use these retained pairs to compute scores, determine the selected subset(s), and assemble the
   final update direction;


                                                     14
4. release the retained tensors once all groups depending on them have been resolved.

This schedule differs fundamentally from retain_graph=True: we do not keep the full autograd
graph alive, but only the minimal local tensors needed for later computation. At the same time,
unlike the two-pass implementation, we do not rerun the backward pass. The result is a one-pass
implementation that stays close to the peak memory cost of standard training while avoiding a
near-doubling of runtime.

When can a group be resolved? The remaining question is when a group can be finalized and its
tensors released. This depends on the partition granularity. For a general partition G = {Gp }P  p=1 ,
the subset St,p for group Gp cannot be determined until all score contributions from the layers
                                                                                              (p)
intersecting Gp have been accumulated. Only after that can the corresponding update ut be
assembled. Therefore, a group can be released only after all of its constituent layers have finished
both scoring and update assembly.
This reveals a direct connection between the statistical design and the systems design: finer partitions
not only give more flexible update rules, but also allow earlier release of tensors and hence a memory
footprint closer to standard training4 .

4.2.2    Case Study: Group Granularity
We illustrate the above scheduling with two extreme cases.

Global Subset Update. For Global Subset Update, all parameters share a single global subset St .
Consequently, the score of each training sample must aggregate contributions from all layers before
St can be determined. This means the retained pairs (a(l) , ∂ℓ/∂e(l) ) must remain alive across the
entire model until scoring is complete. After the global subset St is determined, the final update is
assembled by revisiting each retained layer and averaging the per-sample gradients of the selected
samples (See Algorithm 4.2). Compared with standard training, the peak memory remains close, but
the high-memory period now spans almost the entire backward-and-selection phase (Middle row in
Figure 5).

Layer-Wise Subset Update. At the other extreme, for Layer-Wise Subset Update, each layer forms
its own group. In this case, the score computation, subset selection, and update assembly for layer
l depend only on the local tensors of that same layer. Therefore, once the backward pass reaches
                                                                                                   (l)
layer l, we can immediately compute the layer-wise scores, determine St,l , assemble the update ut ,
and release all retained tensors for that layer before moving to layer l − 1 (See Algorithm 4.3). As a
result, the tensor lifetime schedule almost exactly matches that of standard training, and the memory
footprint is closest to the standard baseline (Bottom row in Figure 5).

Intermediate granularities. More generally, if each group contains a small number of consecutive
layers, then a group’s tensors only need to be retained until the backward pass finishes those layers.
This gives a smooth interpolation between the two extremes above. In particular, smaller groups
allow earlier release and lower sustained memory usage, whereas larger groups delay release and
make the schedule resemble Global Subset Update.
Remark 4.2. One benefit of more aggressive memory release (as in Layer-Wise Subset Update) is
that, in practice, when layer sizes are not uniform, later in the backward pass, encountering a larger
layer provides enough free memory to process it.

In summary, the proposed customized tensor lifetime schedule resolves a core system challenge
of data-regularized updates: it avoids the runtime overhead of a two-pass implementation and the
prohibitive memory cost of retaining the full graph, while enabling a practical one-pass realization
under the memory constraints of modern LLM training.

    4 It is worth noting that the peak memory cost remains similar regardless of the partition granularity, since the peak memory

is achieved right after the forward pass. However, finer granularity becomes helpful when considering other memory-saving
techniques, such as the activation checkpointing discussed in Section 4.4.


                                                              15
     Algorithm 4.2: Global Subset Update
     Data: Model θt , training data {zi }ni=1 , target data {zj⋆ }m
                                                                  j=1 , learning rate ηt
     Result: Updated model parameters θt+1
         (l) (l)           ⋆(l) ⋆(l)                                                  √
 1 (ℓ, {ai , ei }l,i ∪ {aj , ej }l,j )←Forward(θt , {zi }ni=1 ∪ {zj⋆ }m
                                                                      j=1 ) // +O(2N T dL)
 2 for l = L, . . . , 1 do                             // Retain all pairs via swapping
               (l)                ⋆(l)                    (l)
 3      {∂ℓ/∂ei }ni=1 ∪ {∂ℓ/∂ej }m     j=1 ←Backward(ℓ, θt )
 4 /* Post-hoc: scoring from retained activations                                                  */
                                                                                                 √
 5 for l = L, . . . , 1 do                                                          // Peak: 2N T dL
         (l)   PT             (l)     (l)                                                      p
 6     gi ← τ =1 (∂ℓ/∂ei,τ ) ⊗ ai,τ for each i ∈ [n]                                    // +O(n d/L)
         (l)    1
                    Pm PT               ⋆(l)    ⋆(l)                                           p
 7     ĝ⋆ ← m          j=1 τ =1 (∂ℓ/∂ej,τ ) ⊗ aj,τ                                      // +O( d/L)
                         ⋆(l)                ⋆(l)                                              p
 8       Release(aj             , ∂ℓ/∂ej            ) for all j ∈ [m]                // −O(2mT d/L)
          (l)          (l)     (l)
 9    si ← ⟨ĝ⋆ , gi ⟩ for each i ∈ [n]
                 (l)  (l)                                                                            p
10    Release(gi , ĝ⋆ ) for all i ∈ [n]                                           // −O((n + 1)         d/L)
        PL (l)
11 si ←   l=1 si for all i ∈ [n]                                                       // Global scores
                        n
12 St ←Select-S({si }i=1 , k)

13 /* Post-hoc: assemble gradients from retained activations                                         */
14 ut ← 0 ∈ Rd                                                                                 // +O(d)
15 for l = L, . . . , 1 do
         (l)               PT  (l)      (l)
       ut ← k1 i∈St τ =1 (∂ℓ/∂ei,τ ) ⊗ ai,τ
                   P
16
                         (l)                (l)                                                      p
17     Release(ai , ∂ℓ/∂ei ) for all i ∈ [n]                                          // −O(2nT          d/L)
18 θt ← θt − ηt ut
19 Release(ut )                                                                                // −O(d)
20 return θt+1




     Algorithm 4.3: Layer-Wise Subset Update
     Data: Model θt , training data {zi }ni=1 , target data {zj⋆ }m
                                                                  j=1 , learning rate ηt
     Result: Updated model parameters θt+1
           (l)   (l)                 ⋆(l)    ⋆(l)                                                √
 1 (ℓ, {ai , ei }l,i ∪ {aj , ej }l,j )←Forward(θt , {zi }ni=1 ∪ {zj⋆ }m
                                                                      j=1 )            // +O(2N T dL)
                 d
 2 ut ← 0 ∈ R                                                                                // +O(d)
 3 for l = L, . . . , 1 do
               (l)                  ⋆(l)                    (l)
 4      {∂ℓ/∂ei }ni=1 ∪ {∂ℓ/∂ej }m        j=1 ←Backward(ℓ, θt )
          (l)  P    T           (l)      (l)                                                         p
 5      gi ← τ =1 (∂ℓ/∂ei,τ ) ⊗ ai,τ for each i ∈ [n]                                      // +O(n  d/L)
          (l)   1
                    P   m   P T            ⋆(l)   ⋆(l)                                            p
 6      ĝ⋆ ← m         j=1   τ =1 (∂ℓ/∂ej,τ ) ⊗ aj,τ                                       // +O( d/L)
          (l)          (l)     (l)
 7       si ← ⟨ĝ⋆ , gi ⟩ for each i ∈ [n]
                             (l)
 8       St,l ←Select-S({si }ni=1 , k)
          (l)              (l)
         ut ← k1 i∈St,l gi
                 P
 9
                  (l)   (l)                                                        p
10       Release(gi , ĝ⋆ ) for all i ∈ [n]                           // −O((n + 1) d/L)
                  (l)        (l)   ⋆(l)     ⋆(l)                                   p
11       Release(ai , ∂ℓ/∂ei , aj , ∂ℓ/∂ej ) for all i ∈ [n], j ∈ [m]   // −O(2N T d/L)
12 θt ← θt − ηt ut
13 Release(ut )                                                                                // −O(d)
14 return θt+1




                                                                        16
Standard Training Update (Algorithm 4.1)
      1 ... l ... L ℓ L L                        ...     l         l       ...        1     1




Global Subset Update (Algorithm 4.2)
      1 ... l ... L ℓ L                    ...     l         ...       1             1: L         L   ...         l   ...   1




Layer-Wise Subset Update (Algorithm 4.3)
      1 ... l ... L ℓ L L L                            ...         l    l        l        ...     1   1     1




                        Forward         Backward                   Gradient                     Scoring

Figure 5: Memory footprint comparison. Top: Standard Training Update (Algorithm 4.1). Middle:
Global Subset Update (Algorithm 4.2). Bottom: Layer-Wise Subset Update (Algorithm 4.3). All
three methods achieve comparable peak memory per layer, but Global Subset Update must retain
both a(l) and ∂ℓ/∂e(l) for all l throughout the backward pass until the global subset is determined,
while standard training and Layer-Wise Subset Update release them on-the-fly.


4.3   Efficient Implementations of Per-Sample Scoring

We next study efficient implementations of per-sample scoring, which constitutes a major compu-
tational overhead introduced by data-regularized updates. While the tensor lifetime schedule in
Section 4.2 resolves the memory-management challenge of preserving the necessary intermediate
quantities within one pass, the overall efficiency of the method still depends critically on how the
per-sample scores are computed.
In this subsection, we revisit two existing methods for score computation and introduce two new vari-
ants. We then provide a systematic complexity analysis in terms of the key training hyperparameters.
This analysis reveals that the relative advantages of different implementations depend strongly on the
hyperparameter regime, and that this regime-dependent comparison has not been fully characterized
in the existing literature. Among these methods, one of our proposed variants—an approximate
scoring method—achieves the best computational efficiency across all regimes.
                                                                                                            (l)
Throughout this section, we focus on the score restricted to one particular layer, si , since when a
parameter group spans multiple layers, the total score is simply the sum of the scores from those
layers.

Table 1: Computational overhead of scoring per layer for n training samples and m target samples,
where N = n + m, T denotes the sequence length, and κ is the compressed gradient dimension
(κ ≪ d/L). All costs listed below represent additional overhead beyond standard backpropagation.
We assume fully batched execution in calculating the complexity; micro-batching over samples or
tokens can trade parallelism for lower memory, which further favors the proposed PIP method.

           Scoring method          FLOPs per layer                     Memory per layer (entries)
           Direct                2N T (d/L) p
                                            + n(d/L)                              (n + 1)(d/L)
           GIP                      4nmT 2 d/L  p                                    2nmTp 2

           PIP                  2N T (d/L) + nT d/L                              d/L + nT d/L
           Compressed           O(N T κ) + (2n + m)κ                                (n + 1)κ



                                                   17
4.3.1   Existing Methods: Direct and Ghost Inner Product (GIP)
We first revisit two existing methods, Direct and Ghost Inner Product (GIP).

Direct. Direct is a naive approach for the score computation. It directly materializes each per-
                 (l)   P         (l)     (l)                         (l)
sample gradient gi = τ (∂ℓ/∂ei,τ ) ⊗ ai,τ and the target gradient ĝ⋆ first, then computes the
          (l)     (l)   (l)
score as si = ⟨ĝ⋆ , gi ⟩. Existing literature criticizes this naive approach for materializing O(n)
per-sample gradient vectors and incurring high computational costs, which led to the GIP introduced
below [Wang et al., 2024b]. However, we demonstrate that the comparison between Direct and GIP is
more nuanced than the literature suggested when considering the sequence length T and the number
of target samples m.

Ghost Inner Product (GIP) [Wang et al., 2024b]. GIP avoids the full gradient materialization
(thus the name “Ghost”) by evaluating the same inner product in an alternative contraction order
from a(l) and ∂ℓ/∂e(l) : contracting over the model dimension
                                                        √         instead of the token dimension yields
                                            (l) (l)       d/L×T
T × T cross-correlations. Treating ∂ℓ/∂e , a ∈ R                    as matrices whose columns are the
per-token vectors, the score is
                                     m
                                       *           !⊤                       +
                          (l)    1 X          ∂ℓ       ∂ℓ        (l) ⊤ ⋆(l)
                         si =                  (l)      ⋆(l)
                                                             , (ai ) aj        ,
                                 m j=1       ∂e       ∂e
                                               i        j

where each factor is a T × T matrix product computed over all nm training-target pairs. While this
avoids gradient materialization, it introduces quadratic dependence on T and linear dependence on
m.

Comparison between Direct and GIP. As shown in Table 1, GIP is competitive only when m
and T are relatively small. By comparing the
                                          p leading terms in the computational complexity, GIP
is preferable to Direct only when mT ≲ d/L/2. A similar trend holds for the memory cost
comparison as well.

4.3.2   Per-Token Inner Product (PIP)
The comparison shows that GIP suffers from long context (large T ) while Direct suffers from large
parameter size per layer (large d/L). We now introduce a third method, Per-Token Inner Product
(PIP), that interpolates between these two methods and provides a more favorable computation cost
trade-off in an important regime.
Observing that the GIP differs from Direct by swapping the order of some linear operators (sum
                                            (l)
               √ in calculating the score si , our proposed PIP applies a different order. Let
and inner√product)
  (l)                                                                              (l)
Ĝ⋆ ∈ R d/L× d/L denote the matrix form of the aggregated target gradient ĝ⋆ . Then the score
can be written as                                    !⊤
                                          T
                                  (l)
                                        X       ∂ℓ        (l) (l)
                                si =             (l)
                                                        Ĝ⋆ ai,τ .
                                        τ =1   ∂ei,τ
                                                                                 √
                                                                       (l) (l)
This expression factors the computation into a matrix-vector product Ĝ⋆ ai,τ ∈ R d/L , followed
                              (l)
by a dot product with ∂ℓ/∂ei,τ . Importantly, this avoids materializing the full per-sample training
          (l)
gradient gi : the score is accumulated directly from token-level quantities that are already available
under the tensor lifetime schedule.

Comparison with existing methods. As shown in Table 1, the complexities of PIP remain linear in
the sequence length T , and therefore avoid the quadratic dependence on T that makes GIP unattractive
for long-context training. Compared with Direct, PIPphas the same dominant FLOPs p term 2N T (d/L),
but replaces the lower-order term n(d/L) with nT d/L. Therefore, when T ≲ d/L, PIP is more
efficient than Direct in both FLOPs and memory. Intuitively, in this regime, it is cheaper to work
directly with token-level quantities than to first materialize n full per-sample
                                                                         p       gradients. When T
becomes large, however, this advantage disappears: the additional nT d/L term dominates, and


                                                   18
Direct becomes preferable. Thus, PIP occupies an intermediate regime between GIP and Direct:
it improves substantially over GIP for long sequences, and improves over Direct when the context
length is moderate relative to the per-layer hidden dimension.

4.3.3    Compressed Scoring
All three methods above compute the score exactly, and therefore their cost necessarily depends on
the gradient dimension d/L. We now introduce a fourth method, Compressed Scoring, which reduces
this cost by approximately computing the score in a low-dimensional compressed space.
Let Π(l) : Rd/L → Rκ be a compression map with κ ≪ d/L. Instead of directly computing the full
                              (l)                     (l)
per-sample training gradient gi and target gradient ĝ⋆ , we first compute their compressed versions
                         (l)         (l)                    (l)          (l)
                       g̃i := Π(l) (gi ) ∈ Rκ ,           g̃⋆ := Π(l) (ĝ⋆ ) ∈ Rκ ,
and then approximate the score by
                                           (l)      (l)     (l)
                                          si ≈ ⟨g̃⋆ , g̃i ⟩.
                       (l)      (l)
The key point is that g̃i and g̃⋆ can be computed directly from the retained token-level quantities
(a(l) , ∂ℓ/∂e(l) ), without ever materializing the full d/L-dimensional gradients. In particular, since
  (l)    PT             (l)     (l)
gi = τ =1 (∂ℓ/∂ei,τ ) ⊗ ai,τ , state-of-the-art gradient compression methods in data attribution
literature [Hu et al., 2025a, Choe et al., 2025] can exploit this outer-product structure and apply the
projection Π(l) in a factorized manner (see Section C.3 for more details). As a result, the compressed
per-sample gradient can be obtained from the same retained local tensors used throughout Section 4.2,
but with cost scaling only in the compressed dimension κ.

Comparison with exact methods. As shown in Table 1, Compressed Scoring has per-layer cost
O(N T κ) + (2n + m)κ and memory cost (n + 1)κ, which removes the dependence on the original
gradient dimension d/L from both FLOPs and memory. Since κ ≪ d/L, this makes Compressed
Scoring strictly more efficient than all three exact methods across all regimes in terms of the leading
dimension dependence.
While the gain in efficiency of Compressed Scoring comes at the price of approximation, empirically,
we find the approximate scores remain a reliable surrogate for ranking or filtering training samples [Hu
et al., 2025a]. In our implementation, we therefore use Compressed Scoring as the default choice.

4.4     Compatibility with Memory-Saving Techniques in Modern Infrastructure

Modern LLM training pipelines employ a range of memory-saving techniques to mitigate the tight
memory constraints. Since our methods introduce additional per-sample computational dependencies
beyond standard training, a key system question is whether the proposed methods remain compatible
with these techniques, including parameter-efficient training, activation checkpointing, and gradient
accumulation.
In this subsection, we show that the proposed methods, especially Layer-Wise Subset Update, can be
largely integrated with common memory-saving strategies given our system optimizations.

4.4.1    Compatibility with Parameter-Efficient Training
We first consider two widely-used parameter-efficient training methods, LoRA [Hu et al., 2022] and
MeSO [Zhao et al., 2024]. Both reduce memory consumption by restricting or compressing the
trainable update space, and both are naturally compatible with our framework.

                                                                           (l)        (l)   (l)   (l)
LoRA.
  √        Recall that LoRA √ reparametrizes each   linear layer as Wt + Bt At , where Bt ∈
                  (l)                            p
R d/L×r and At ∈ Rr× d/L with rank r ≪ d/L, and only the adapter parameters are updated.
         (l)       (l)
Since At and Bt are themselves linear maps, per-sample gradients retainpthe same outer-product
factorization as in the full-parameter case, with the adapter dimension 2r d/L replacing the full
dimension d/L. All scoring and gradient computation carry over directly at proportionally lower cost
(details in Section C.5.1).


                                                  19
MeSO. MeSO methods reduce memory in a different way: instead of restricting the trainable
parameters, they maintain optimizer states and updates in a compressed subspace. This is also
compatible with our framework, since data regularization only changes how the update direction is
chosen, not how the resulting gradient is applied. In particular, any scoring method from Section 4.3
can be used to determine the selected subset, after which the resulting gradient update is passed to
the MeSO optimizer in the usual compressed form.
There is also a tighter integration between MeSO and the Compressed Scoring method in Section 4.3.3.
Since both rely on low-dimensional gradient representations, the same compressed per-sample
gradients can be used both for score computation and for the optimizer update, avoiding redundant
computation. This makes MeSO especially well aligned with our framework: it reduces the memory
cost of optimization itself, while also supporting efficient approximate scoring in the same compressed
space. We detail the full space of design choices in Section C.5.2.

4.4.2   Compatibility with Memory-Saving Scheduling Techniques
We now turn to two techniques that reduce memory by changing the temporal structure of training:
activation checkpointing and gradient accumulation. Unlike LoRA and MeSO, these methods affect
when intermediate tensors are available, and therefore interact more directly with our tensor lifetime
schedule.

Activation checkpointing. Activation checkpointing reduces memory by discarding some forward
activations and recomputing them on demand during backward. Our one-pass tensor lifetime schedule
is compatible with checkpointing whenever the parameter groups align with the checkpointing
schedule, so that all computations associated with a group can be resolved within a checkpoint
segment. Layer-Wise Subset Update satisfies this condition naturally, since each layer forms its own
group and can therefore be resolved within its own backward step.
When a group spans multiple checkpoint segments, however, the one-pass schedule can no longer
preserve all required local tensors across segment boundaries without defeating the purpose of
checkpointing. In this case, one must revert to the two-pass implementation discussed in Section 4.2:
the first pass computes scores and determines the subsets, and the second pass assembles the update
(see Section C.2.2). Thus, the compatibility with checkpointing depends on whether the partition
granularity is aligned with the memory-saving schedule.

Gradient accumulation. Gradient accumulation reduces peak memory by splitting a large batch
into micro-batches that are processed sequentially, and the activations and pre-activation gradients
associated with an earlier micro-batch are typically released before the next one is processed for
saving memory. This conflicts with our one-pass implementation, which relies on retaining the
         (l)      (l)
pairs (ai , ∂ℓ/∂ei ) for all samples in the full batch in order to compute scores and assemble the
final update. When the rule for determining St,p decomposes across micro-batches, however, this
issue resolves: each micro-batch can be scored, solved, and assembled independently during its own
forward and backward pass, and the resulting updates can then be accumulated across micro-batches.
Thresholding is one such example. In contrast, rules such as top-k depend on statistics computed
over the entire batch, so the micro-batches cannot be resolved independently. In this case, we again
resort to the two-pass implementation described in Section C.2.2.

5   Experiments
We evaluate our proposed methods across three post-training paradigms: supervised fine-tuning (SFT;
Section 5.1), reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF; Section 5.2), and reinforcement
learning with verifiable rewards (RLVR; Section 5.3). Across these settings, we compare against
state-of-the-art baselines and show consistent improvements in downstream-task performance and
convergence speed. We then benchmark the efficiency of the end-to-end training pipeline and different
scoring mechanisms in Section 5.4, demonstrating that our implementation incurs minimal overhead.
Our code can be found at https://github.com/TRAIS-Lab/Dr.Post-Training.
Unless otherwise specified, all reported results are averaged over 5 random seeds with error bars
given as standard errors of the mean, and evaluation is performed on held-out test sets disjoint from
the data used for regularization or training. Additional details are deferred to Section D.


                                                  20
    5.1                 Supervised Fine-Tuning

   We first evaluate our methods in the SFT setting, where a model is fine-tuned on an instruction-style
   training dataset and evaluated on a distinct downstream benchmark. This setting tests whether
   data-regularized updates can better transfer general supervision toward a target objective. Our results
   show that Layer-Wise Subset Update substantially outperforms the prior state-of-the-art online data
   selection baseline. We further provide a case study to analyze the factors driving this performance
   gap.

    5.1.1                Setup

   We fine-tune L LAMA -3.2-1B [Grattafiori et al., 2024] on four training/target pairs that span different
   task types and training-pool compositions. 1.) alpaca [Taori et al., 2023]/samsum [Gliwa et al.,
   2019] (dialogue summarization), 2.) less-mix [Xia et al., 2024a]/tydiqa [Clark et al., 2020]
   (multilingual extractive QA), 3.) triviaqa [Joshi et al., 2017]/nq_open [Kwiatkowski et al., 2019]
   (closed-book factoid QA), and 4.) less-mix [Xia et al., 2024a]/squad [Rajpurkar et al., 2016]
   (reading-comprehension QA without context).
   Across all four settings we report results under LoRA, our default fine-tuning variant. To additionally
   probe how the choice of fine-tuning method interacts with data regularization and demonstrate
   flexibility of our method with different fine-tuning methods, we also report results for full-parameter
   fine-tuning and MeSO on alpaca/samsum. All runs share the same fixed hyperparameters; see
   Section D.2 for the full configuration.
   Data regularization is done with a small held-out target set (16 samples in total), following the setting
   of the prior state-of-the-art online baseline GREATS [Wang et al., 2024b]. Specifically, we consider
   n = 8 and m = 1 for training, i.e., each optimization step has access to 8 samples from the general
   training set and 1 sample from the held-out target set. In our framework, GREATS corresponds to
   Global Subset Update, while our method uses Layer-Wise Subset Update, where we approximately
   solve Eq.(3) by the top-k among the scores with k = n/2.5

    5.1.2                Results

    Figure 6 shows the training dynamics of alpaca/samsum with three fine-tuning methods, and Table 2
    reports downstream F1 on the other three QA settings, with Figure 7 showing their corresponding
    training dynamics. Layer-Wise Subset Update consistently and substantially outperforms both
    Full-Training Update and Global Subset Update on every QA setting (and Global Subset, in turn,
    improves on Full-Training). The gap is most pronounced when the training pool is broad, i.e.,
    less-mix/tydiqa jumps from 10.1% to 27.4% F1 between Full-Training and Layer-Wise Subset,
    confirming that data regularization matters most when the general distribution is misaligned with the
    target. We defer a detailed efficiency analysis to Section 5.4.


                         (a) Full parameter                                   (b) LoRA                                       (c) MeSO




Eval Perplexity
              7.2                                           7.2                                              7.2
              6.4                                           6.4                                              6.4
              5.6                                           5.6                                              5.6
              4.8                                           4.8                                              4.8
                    0      600     1200   1800   2400             0     600       1200      1800   2400            0   600     1200     1800   2400
                                   Step                                            Step                                         Step
                                                        Full-Training         Layer-Wise Subset      Global Subset

    Figure 6: SFT training dynamics on alpaca/samsum across the three fine-tuning methods: evaluation
    perplexity throughout training.


                  5We omit the Target-Only Update in our experiments (i.e., training on only 16 samples) due to training instability.




                                                                                  21
                                             Table 2: SFT downstream F1 (%) on the three QA settings.

                        Method                              less-mix/tydiqa                                       triviaqa/nq_open                                       less-mix/squad
                        Full-Training                                     10.1 ± 0.2                                        12.6 ± 0.1                                           7.6 ± 0.1
                        Global Subset                                     13.4 ± 1.0                                        13.7 ± 0.2                                           8.3 ± 0.1
                        Layer-Wise Subset                               27.4 ± 1.3                                          14.6 ± 0.4                                         9.1 ± 0.3


                        (a) less-mix/tydiqa                                              (b) triviaqa/nq_open                                                           (c) less-mix/squad
                                                                                24                                                                         125




Eval Perplexity                                                   Eval Perplexity                                                            Eval Perplexity
              6.0                                                                                                                                          100
                                                                                21
              4.5                                                               18                                                                             75

              3.0                                                               15                                                                             50
                                                                                12                                                                             25
                    0      300        600      900        1200                       0      200       400                 600       800                             0      300      600      900   1200
                                      Step                                                             Step                                                                         Step
                                                                 Full-Training                Layer-Wise Subset                      Global Subset

    Figure 7: SFT training dynamics on the three QA settings: evaluation perplexity throughout training.


    5.1.3                Case Study
   To understand why Layer-Wise Subset Update outperforms Global Subset Update, we conduct a
   case study in which we record per-layer scores during Full-Training Update on alpaca/samsum
   with full-parameter fine-tuning. At each training step, we separately score the same batch of n = 8
   samples as in Layer-Wise Subset Update and Global Subset Update, and compute (i) the mean
   absolute score per layer (magnitude), and (ii) the Spearman rank correlation between each layer’s
   per-sample scores and the subset’s global ranking. Figure 8 plots these quantities across all 16 blocks,
   with lines showing the mean across training steps and shaded bands the interquartile range. We
   aggregate the results by transformer blocks and layer types: each transformer block contains seven
   linear layers, namely four attention projections (query (Q), key (K), value (V), and output (O)) and
   three MLP projections (gate, up, and down).

                  (a) Mean absolute score magnitude (log scale)                                                           (b) Spearman ρ with subset’s global ranking
                  101                                                                                                 1.0
                                                                                                                      0.8



                                                                                                       Rank Correlation
                                             32×



Average Score
                  100                                                                                                                                      = 0.88
                                                                                                                      0.6
                  10 1                                                                                                0.4
                                                                                                                      0.2
                  10 2
                                                                                                                      0.0
                           0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112131415                                                                     0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
                                            Transformer Block                                                                                        Transformer Block

                           Q [Attn]            K [Attn]               V [Attn]                    O [Attn]                      Gate [MLP]                          Up [MLP]         Down [MLP]

    Figure 8: Per-layer scores on alpaca/samsum, averaged across training steps (lines) with 25th –75th
    interquartile bands. Score magnitudes vary by orders of magnitude across layer types, so Global
    Subset Update’s global ranking is dominated by down_proj while layers like Q and K (ρ ≲ 0.2)
    receive effectively uncurated data.

   The magnitudes (Figure 8(a)) are heavily skewed: down_proj at block 1 produces scores 32× larger
   than the second-largest layer type at the same block, even though K and V projections share an
   identical input–output shape (512 × 2048). Since Global Subset Update aggregates scores across all


                                                                                                     22
layers into a single per-sample ranking, the resulting subset is dominated by whichever layer type
has the largest magnitude. Figure 8(b) confirms this: down_proj achieves near-perfect agreement
with the global ranking (ρ ≈ 0.88), while Q and K projections remain near zero (ρ ≲ 0.2). These
32 layers (out of 112 block-level linear layers) have essentially no influence on which samples they
receive under Global Subset Update. Layer-Wise Subset Update resolves this by letting each layer
independently determine its own training subset. The same pattern holds across the other three QA
settings (Section D.2.4); the magnitude ratio between down_proj and the second-largest layer type
ranges from 22× to 38×, and the global-ranking correlation for the dominant down_proj layer
ranges from ρ ≈ 0.90 to ρ ≈ 0.94.


5.2     Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback

We next evaluate in the RLHF setting, where we apply Dr. Post-Training framework beyond the
training-target distribution setting.

5.2.1    Setup

We follow a standard RLHF pipeline using
TRL [von Werra et al., 2020] with PPO [Schul-       (a) Avg. reward target                (b) Pre-clip PPO target
man et al., 2017] for detoxification [Hugging        4.5                                4.5
                                                     4.0                                4.0

                                                            Reward
Face, 2023], using GPT-N EO -2.7B [Black
                                                     3.5                                3.5
et al., 2021] with LoRA. The policy generates
                                                     3.0                                3.0
continuations scored by a toxicity-based reward
model (LFTW R4 Target [Vidgen et al., 2021]),       0.06                               0.06



                                                            Eval Toxicity
and is evaluated using a separate toxicity detec-   0.04                               0.04
tor (da-electra-hatespeech-detection).              0.03                               0.03
We compare four methods: (i) standard PPO           0.01                               0.01
without data curation, (ii) IIF [Hu et al., 2025b],      0      15     30     45 60         0     15    30     45      60
which pre-filters the entire rollout batch once be-                  Round                            Round
fore PPO optimization begins (offline Global           Full-Training       IIF      Layer-Wise Subset      Global Subset
Subset Update), (iii) Global Subset Update,
which curates each mini-batch during PPO with Figure 9: RLHF (self-reference target). Top. Train-
a single global selection across all layers, and ing reward. Bottom. Evaluation toxicity.
(iv) Layer-Wise Subset Update, which indepen-
dently selects samples per layer within each mini-batch.
All curation methods use negative score filtering,
retaining only samples with non-negative gra-                         (a) Avg. reward target                           (b) Pre-clip PPO target
dient alignment. We further ablate two design                               4.5                                       4.5
                                                                            4.0                                       4.0

                                                            Reward
choices: (i) target signal source: self-referenc-
                                                                            3.5                                       3.5
ing (the same rollout batch) versus a new roll-
                                                                            3.0                                       3.0
out on a held-out target set, and (ii) target loss:
reward-weighted log-probability versus the pre–                         0.06                                         0.06



                                                            Eval Toxicity
clip PPO surrogate. As described in Section 3.5,                        0.04                                         0.04
the PPO surrogate here acts as a stabilizing con-                       0.03                                         0.03
straint on the (high-variance) policy gradient sig-                     0.01                                         0.01
nal, generalizing the training-target distribution                                0   15       30       45   60             0   15     30      45      60
perspective.                                                                                  Round                                   Round
                                                                              Full-Training           IIF         Layer-Wise Subset         Global Subset

5.2.2    Results                                            Figure 10: RLHF (held-out target). Top. Training
                                                            reward. Bottom. Evaluation toxicity.
Figures 9 and 10 show results across all four
configurations. Layer-Wise Subset Update con-
sistently achieves the highest training rewards and the lowest evaluation toxicity, followed by Global
Subset Update, across both target signal sources and both target loss functions. Comparing the two
target sources, the held-out target leads to higher final rewards, while the self-referencing target
primarily accelerates early convergence. Among the target losses, the reward-weighted objective
outperforms the pre-clip PPO surrogate in both settings.


                                                          23
5.3     Reinforcement Learning with Verifiable Rewards

Finally, we evaluate in the RLVR setting, where rewards are computed by an automatic verifier.

5.3.1    Setup
We use the Verl framework [Sheng et al., 2024] with GRPO [Shao et al., 2024] on the MATH
dataset [Hendrycks et al., 2021] with Q WEN 3-1.7B [Qwen Team, 2025]. We compare Layer-Wise
Subset Update against standard GRPO training (no data curation) and Global Subset Update. We
instantiate the data regularization framework as in-run cross-validation: one mini-batch serves as the
training batch, another as the target batch, and gradient alignment scores drive the negative score
filtering of the training batch.

5.3.2    Results
Figure 11 shows our proposed Layer-Wise Subset Up-
date method again achieves the best downstream per-                                                   0.62



                                                                                             Accuracy
formance in the RLVR setting. In particular, Global
                                                                                                      0.60
Subset Update accelerates early training but converges
to roughly the same accuracy as standard GRPO. Layer-                                                 0.57
Wise Subset Update, by contrast, sustains its advantage
throughout and achieves a consistently higher final ac-                                               0.55
curacy.                                                                                               0.53
                                                                                                               0         15        30         45          60          75
                                                                                                                                        Round
5.4     System Efficiency                                                                               Full-Training         Layer-Wise Subset             Global Subset

We benchmark the system efficiency of different meth- Figure 11: RLVR on MATH with Q WEN 3-
ods in Section 3 and scoring mechanisms from Sec- 1.7B. Evaluation accuracy over training.
tion 4: (i) Breakdown: end-to-end training overhead at
n = 8, T = 512, m = 1 with compressed scoring; and (ii) Scoring: standalone timing on synthetic
tensors at fixed n = 8, sweeping T at m = 1 and m at T = 512 to validate the crossover predictions
from Section 4.3. All benchmarks are conducted on three models from three different architecture
families—S MOL LM2-360M [Allal et al., 2025], T INY L LAMA -1.1B [Zhang et al., 2024], and
L LAMA -3.2-3B [Grattafiori et al., 2024]—using bfloat16 on a single A40 GPU. The three families
are chosen to factor out family-specific kernel quirks.

5.4.1    Per-Step Breakdown
Table 3 reports the wall-clock overhead of each method relative to Full-Training Update, where each
column is averaged over 20 timed iterations after 10 warmup iterations.
The backward pass is broken into four components: a.grad computes the input activation gradient
∂ℓ/∂a(l) via a single matmul with the weight matrix (the output gradient ∂ℓ/∂e(l) is propagated
from the layer above by autograd and requires no computation at this layer); scoring computes
per-sample alignment scores; w.grad assembles the weight gradient from the selected samples; and
autograd captures the remaining overhead: autograd graph traversal, memory allocation, hook
dispatch, and backward passes of non-linear modules (LayerNorm, activation functions, etc.).

Table 3: Per-step component breakdown (ms) with standard training (Algorithm 4.1), using com-
pressed scoring (n = 8, T = 512, m = 1, k = 4).
                             S MOL LM2-360M                                      T INY L LAMA -1.1B                                      L LAMA -3.2-3B
Component    Full-Training   Layer-Wise Subset   Global Subset   Full-Training   Layer-Wise Subset      Global Subset   Full-Training   Layer-Wise Subset      Global Subset
Forward          78.4               88.6              88.9          155.5               168.4              167.9           343.3             387.5                390.0
Backward        155.7              234.0             193.0          312.5               352.8              344.2           828.2             825.6                820.2
  a.grad        32.5                34.2              33.3          93.3                 96.6               96.6           228.9             255.8                256.8
  scoring         —                 43.8              22.5            —                  35.6               31.3            —                 49.7                 45.4
  w.grad        27.5                43.5              30.7          91.7                 77.2               73.4           342.2             233.1                235.4
  autograd      95.6               112.7             106.5          127.6               143.4              142.9           257.1             287.1                282.6
Optimizer        26.6               26.6              26.6           81.2                81.3               81.2           235.4             235.4                235.5
Total            261             349 (+34%)        309 (+18%)        549              602 (+10%)          593 (+8%)         1407           1449 (+3%)           1446 (+3%)




                                                                                 24
Results. We see that both Layer-Wise and Global Subset Update add only 3–34% wall-clock
overhead compared to Full-Training Update, with overhead shrinking sharply as the model grows:
from 34% (Layer-Wise) and 18% (Global Subset) on S MOL LM2-360M down to 3% for both
methods on L LAMA -3.2-3B. Focusing on w.grad, we see that when the model is small (S MOL LM2-
360M), the time required for both Layer-Wise and Global Subset is similar to or even larger than
Full-Training Update, despite the fact that we only materialize the batch gradient from k = 4 samples.
This is mainly due to the artifact of the model being too small: as the model grows, the differences
start to show, eventually approaching n/k = 2 times more efficient when the bottlenecks become
compute-bound rather than IO/kernel launching-bound (e.g., on L LAMA -3.2-3B w.grad drops from
342 ms to ∼ 234 ms, a ∼ 1.46× reduction). This further explains why the overheads become smaller
as the model size grows.

Activation checkpointing. As we discussed in Section 4.4, the key efficiency difference between
different partition granularities under Group-Wise Subset Update, such as Global Subset Update and
Layer-Wise Subset Update, is their memory footprint and compatibility with modern memory-saving
techniques like activation checkpointing.

Table 4: Per-step component breakdown (ms) with activation checkpointing, using compressed
scoring (n = 8, T = 512, m = 1, k = 4).
                               S MOL LM2-360M                                         T INY L LAMA -1.1B                                    L LAMA -3.2-3B
Component     Full-Training    Layer-Wise Subset    Global Subset    Full-Training    Layer-Wise Subset    Global Subset   Full-Training   Layer-Wise Subset   Global Subset
Forward            88.2              109.7              107.7            154.9              167.4              167.1          389.2             437.4              438.4
Backward          249.0              311.4              297.1            453.6              504.3              495.9          1233.5            1279.1            1267.8
  a.grad           40.7               41.0               40.8            93.3                96.8               96.7          269.4              299.4             299.3
  scoring           —                 33.4               26.6              —                 35.5               31.3            —                 60.2              54.7
  w.grad           36.2               43.3               37.5            91.8                77.1               73.4          371.6              254.9             254.0
  autograd        172.0              193.8              192.1            268.5              294.9              294.5          592.5              664.6             659.7
Optimizer          26.8               26.8               26.8             81.2               81.3               81.3          236.8             236.8              236.8
Total              364             448 (+23%)         432 (+19%)         690              753 (+9%)           744 (+8%)        1860            1953 (+5%)       1943 (+4%)



Tables 3 and 4 illustrate this clearly. From Table 4, we see that the relative computational overheads
remain in the same range (4–19% for Global Subset Update, 5–23% for Layer-Wise Subset Update)
as those without checkpointing (Table 3), since checkpointing inflates both the baseline and the
scoring-augmented backward pass roughly in proportion as we expected.
On the other hand, Table 5 reports peak GPU memory. Here, we see that without checkpointing,
peak memory is nearly identical across all methods at the same m; the overhead relative to Full-
Training Update is determined almost entirely by the m additional target samples in the merged batch.
With checkpointing enabled, the memory overhead of Global Subset Update becomes apparent: as
discussed in Section 4.4, for a partition that spans a large number of layers across the checkpointing
schedule, the designed one-pass scheduling fails to respect it, resulting in a similar peak memory
usage as without checkpointing when the model size grows.

Table 5: Peak GPU memory (GB) using compressed scoring (n = 8, T = 512, m = 1, k = 4), with
and without activation checkpointing.
                              S MOL LM2-360M                                         T INY L LAMA -1.1B                                     L LAMA -3.2-3B
             Full-Training    Layer-Wise Subset    Global Subset    Full-Training    Layer-Wise Subset     Global Subset   Full-Training   Layer-Wise Subset   Global Subset
No ckpt          9.4                10.3               10.4             15.0               16.2                16.2            37.9              40.7              40.7
With ckpt        4.6                4.9                 7.5             10.3               10.4                14.5            29.9              30.1              38.1




5.4.2       Scoring Cost
We next benchmark different scoring mechanisms introduced in Section 4.3. Table 6 reports stan-
dalone scoring cost at n = 8, sweeping T at fixed m = 1 and m at fixed T = 512.

Results. We see that across the model size, number of validation samples (m), and also the length
of the sequence (T ), our proposed PIP remains competitive across regimes. More specifically, this
validates the theoretical crossovers from Section 4.3.
At short sequences (T = 512), GIP is the cheapest exact method
                                                           p for all three models (42–71 ms).
At T = 2048, the ranking reverses for models with smaller d/L: Direct becomes cheapest on
S MOL LM2-360M (151  pvs. GIP 441 ms) and T INY L LAMA -1.1B (349 vs. 518 ms), while L LAMA -
3.2-3B (whose larger d/L pushes the crossover beyond T = 2048) retains GIP as cheapest (946


                                                                                     25
Table 6: Standalone scoring cost (ms/step) at n = 8. Bold indicates the cheapest exact method per
column. The T -sweep fixes m = 1; the m-sweep fixes T = 512.
                        S MOL LM2-360M                             T INY L LAMA -1.1B                                 L LAMA -3.2-3B
                     sweep T               sweep m              sweep T                  sweep m               sweep T                 sweep m
 Scoring       512    2048     8192    1      4       8   512    2048     8192       1       4       8   512   2048       8192     1       4       8
 Direct         56     151      571   56     77    99     131     349     1344     131     174     234   415   1166       4076   415     518     668
 GIP            42     441     7073   42    130   239      43     518     8317      43     153     275    71    946      15017    71     273     495
 PIP            53     155      577   53     71    87     103     393     1567     103     141     189   254   1076       4127   254     344     465
 Compressed     29      48      162   29     29      29    25      58        216    25      25      25    40    107        412    40      40     40



ms). By T = 8192, all models have crossed over and Direct is the cheapest exact method, with PIP as
a close runner-up on S MOL LM2-360M (571 vs. 577 ms) and L LAMA -3.2-3B (4076 vs. 4127 ms).
The m-dependent crossover is also confirmed: at T = 512, PIP overtakes GIP at m = 4 for
S MOL LM2-360M (71 vs. 130 ms) and T INY L LAMA -1.1B (141 vs. 153 ms), and at        pm = 8 for
L LAMA -3.2-3B (465 vs. 495 ms), consistent with the predicted crossover at m > d/L/(2T ).
Compressed scoring remains cheapest across all regimes (25–412 ms), making it the practical default.

6     Discussion
In this section, we discuss several aspects related to our proposed framework.

6.1       Classical Regularization

Both data regularization and classical regularization (e.g., weight decay, KL penalties, LoRA’s
low-rank constraint) ultimately constrain the parameter update, but they differ in the source of the
constraint. Classical regularization is usually derived from a data-agnostic complexity measure on θ,
restricting the update through intrinsic properties of the parameters themselves. Data regularization,
by contrast, imposes a data-induced constraint in the parameter-update space via the feasible set Ut ,
whose admissible directions are shaped by the available training samples.

6.2       Designing New Feasible Sets

The Dr. Post-Training framework provides a blueprint for designing new data-centric methods:
(i) define a feasible set U , (ii) design an efficient algorithm that solves u∗ ∈ U based on Eq. (3).
Several natural extensions of the feasible set follow this template:

    P weighting. Replace hard subset constraints with continuous weights: Usoft =
1. Soft
   { i wi gi : w ∈ ∆n }, where ∆n is the probability simplex. The projection Eq. (3) becomes
   a quadratic program over the simplex, solvable in closed form or via efficient Frank-Wolfe
   steps [Nikdan et al., 2025]. This can be further extended to the same group-wise decomposition
   across parameter groups. This relaxation sidesteps the combinatorial search over nk subsets
                                                                                          
   required previously.
2. Token-level granularity. For sequential models, instead of operating at the sample level, operate
   at the token level within each sample, yielding a finer-grained feasible set. Since per-token
   gradients are naturally available during backpropagation, this can be implemented within the
   existing Group-Wise Subset Update pipeline.

6.3       Connection to Domain Adaptation

The mismatch between general-purpose pretraining corpora and a narrow target task is a recurring
theme in transfer learning and domain adaptation [Pan and Yang, 2009]. A long line of work has
studied when and how such transfer succeeds, highlighting source–target divergence and the risk
of negative transfer as central concerns [Ben-David et al., 2010]. Classical remedies operate at the
instance level: reweighting examples under covariate shift [Sugiyama et al., 2007], adapting feature
representations [Daumé III, 2007], aligning domains adversarially [Ganin et al., 2016], or combining
multiple source domains [Guo et al., 2018]. In the LLM era, continued in-domain or task-adaptive
pretraining has become the de facto approach for reducing this mismatch [Gururangan et al., 2020].


                                                                        26
Our framework addresses the same general training–target gap, but at a fundamentally different
level of abstraction. Where instance reweighting corrects the empirical risk via density ratios and
representation alignment enforces domain invariance in hidden states, both are specific algorithmic
choices for bridging the domain gap. Dr. Post-Training instead formulates general training data as a
regularizer on the target-driven update direction, yielding an explicit per-step bias–variance tradeoff
governed by the feasible set U . This perspective not only subsumes existing instance-level strategies
as special cases of the feasible set but also opens the door to beyond-instance designs such as Group-
Wise Subset Update, where different parameter groups draw on different training subsets within a
single optimization step—a capability that falls outside the scope of standard domain-adaptation
formulations.

7   Conclusion
In this work, we propose Dr. Post-Training, a data regularization framework for LLM post-training
that leverage the abundant yet imperfectly aligned general training data a regularizer that constrains
target-driven updates. This framework provides an alternative view of existing data selection methods
and further leads to natural generalization, broadening the design space and shedding light on their
respective tradeoffs. With extensive system optimization, we offer an efficient implementation of our
proposed methods under strict memory constraints in modern LLM training pipelines. Experiments
across SFT, RLHF, and RLVR demonstrated consistent improvements over strong baselines with
minimal system overhead.




                                                  27
Acknowledgment
The authors would like to thank Joe Melkonian for helpful discussions at the early stage of this
project. P. Hu and J.W. Ma are partially supported by a gift grant from Google.

References
A. Albalak, Y. Elazar, S. M. Xie, S. Longpre, N. Lambert, X. Wang, N. Muennighoff, B. Hou, L. Pan,
   H. Jeong, C. Raffel, S. Chang, T. Hashimoto, and W. Y. Wang. A survey on data selection for
   language models. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2024. ISSN 2835-8856. URL
   https://openreview.net/forum?id=XfHWcNTSHp. Survey Certification.

L. B. Allal, A. Lozhkov, E. Bakouch, G. M. Blázquez, G. Penedo, L. Tunstall, A. Marafioti, H. Ky-
   dlíček, A. P. Lajarín, V. Srivastav, et al. Smollm2: When smol goes big–data-centric training of a
   small language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.02737, 2025.

J. L. Ba, J. R. Kiros, and G. E. Hinton. Layer normalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.06450, 2016.

Y. Bai, A. Jones, K. Ndousse, A. Askell, A. Chen, N. DasSarma, D. Drain, S. Fort, D. Ganguli,
   T. Henighan, et al. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with reinforcement learning from
   human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862, 2022.

S. Ben-David, J. Blitzer, K. Crammer, A. Kulesza, F. Pereira, and J. W. Vaughan. A theory of learning
   from different domains. Machine learning, 79(1):151–175, 2010.

S. Black, G. Leo, P. Wang, C. Leahy, and S. Biderman. GPT-Neo: Large Scale Autoregressive
   Language Modeling with Mesh-Tensorflow, Mar. 2021. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/
   zenodo.5297715. If you use this software, please cite it using these metadata.

L. Bottou, F. E. Curtis, and J. Nocedal. Optimization methods for large-scale machine learning. SIAM
   review, 60(2):223–311, 2018.

Y. Cao, Y. Kang, C. Wang, and L. Sun. Instruction mining: Instruction data selection for tuning large
   language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.06290, 2023.

S. Casper, X. Davies, C. Shi, T. K. Gilbert, J. Scheurer, J. Rando, R. Freedman, T. Korbak, D. Lindner,
   P. Freire, et al. Open problems and fundamental limitations of reinforcement learning from human
   feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15217, 2023.

L. Chen, S. Li, J. Yan, H. Wang, K. Gunaratna, V. Yadav, Z. Tang, V. Srinivasan, T. Zhou, H. Huang,
   et al. Alpagasus: Training a better alpaca with fewer data. In The Twelfth International Conference
   on Learning Representations, 2024.

T. Chen, B. Xu, C. Zhang, and C. Guestrin. Training deep nets with sublinear memory cost. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:1604.06174, 2016.

S. K. Choe, H. Ahn, J. Bae, K. Zhao, M. Kang, Y. Chung, A. Pratapa, W. Neiswanger, E. Strubell,
   T. Mitamura, et al. What is your data worth to gpt? llm-scale data valuation with influence
   functions. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2025.

P. F. Christiano, J. Leike, T. Brown, M. Martic, S. Legg, and D. Amodei. Deep reinforcement learning
   from human preferences. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.

J. H. Clark, E. Choi, M. Collins, D. Garrette, T. Kwiatkowski, V. Nikolaev, and J. Palomaki. Tydi
   qa: A benchmark for information-seeking question answering in ty pologically di verse languages.
   Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 8:454–470, 2020.

H. Daumé III. Frustratingly easy domain adaptation. In Proceedings of the 45th annual meeting of
  the association of computational linguistics, pages 256–263, 2007.


                                                  28
J. Deng, Y. Hu, P. Hu, T.-W. Li, S. Liu, J. T. Wang, D. Ley, Q. Dai, B. Huang, J. Huang, C. Jiao, H. A.
   Just, Y. Pan, J. Shen, Y. Tu, W. Wang, X. Wang, S. Zhang, S. Zhang, R. Jia, H. Lakkaraju, H. Peng,
   W. Tang, C. Xiong, J. Zhao, H. Tong, H. Zhao, and J. W. Ma. A survey of data attribution: Methods,
   applications, and evaluation in the era of generative ai. SSRN, 2025. doi: 10.2139/ssrn.5451054.
   Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5451054.

T. Dettmers, A. Pagnoni, A. Holtzman, and L. Zettlemoyer. Qlora: Efficient finetuning of quantized
   llms. Advances in neural information processing systems, 36:10088–10115, 2023.

K. Ethayarajh, Y. Choi, and S. Swayamdipta. Understanding dataset difficulty with V-usable
  information. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 5988–6008. PMLR, 2022.

Y. Ganin, E. Ustinova, H. Ajakan, P. Germain, H. Larochelle, F. Laviolette, M. March, and V. Lempit-
   sky. Domain-adversarial training of neural networks. Journal of machine learning research, 17
   (59):1–35, 2016.

S. Gehman, S. Gururangan, M. Sap, Y. Choi, and N. A. Smith. Realtoxicityprompts: Evaluating
   neural toxic degeneration in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.11462, 2020.

A. Ghorbani and J. Zou. Data shapley: Equitable valuation of data for machine learning. In
  International conference on machine learning, pages 2242–2251. PMLR, 2019.

B. Gliwa, I. Mochol, M. Biesek, and A. Wawer. Samsum corpus: A human-annotated dialogue
   dataset for abstractive summarization. EMNLP-IJCNLP 2019, page 70, 2019.

A. Grattafiori, A. Dubey, A. Jauhri, A. Pandey, A. Kadian, A. Al-Dahle, A. Letman, A. Mathur,
  A. Schelten, A. Vaughan, et al. The llama 3 herd of models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783,
  2024.

S. Gunasekar, Y. Zhang, J. Aneja, C. C. T. Mendes, A. Del Giorno, S. Gopi, M. Javaheripi, P. Kauff-
   mann, G. de Rosa, O. Saarikivi, et al. Textbooks are all you need. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.11644,
   2023.

D. Guo, D. Yang, H. Zhang, J. Song, P. Wang, Q. Zhu, R. Xu, R. Zhang, S. Ma, X. Bi, et al.
  Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2501.12948, 2025.

J. Guo, D. Shah, and R. Barzilay. Multi-source domain adaptation with mixture of experts. In
   Proceedings of the 2018 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing, pages
   4694–4703, 2018.

S. Gururangan, A. Marasović, S. Swayamdipta, K. Lo, I. Beltagy, D. Downey, and N. A. Smith.
   Don’t stop pretraining: Adapt language models to domains and tasks. In Proceedings of the 58th
   annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics, pages 8342–8360, 2020.

X. Han and Y. Tsvetkov. Influence tuning: Demoting spurious correlations via instance attribution and
   instance-driven update. In M.-F. Moens, X. Huang, L. Specia, and S. W.-t. Yih, editors, Findings
   of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2021, pages 4398–4409, Punta Cana,
   Dominican Republic, Nov. 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/
   2021.findings-emnlp.374. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.findings-emnlp.374/.

Z. Han, C. Gao, J. Liu, J. Zhang, and S. Q. Zhang. Parameter-efficient fine-tuning for large models:
   A comprehensive survey. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2024. ISSN 2835-8856.
   URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=lIsCS8b6zj.

T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, J. H. Friedman, and J. H. Friedman. The elements of statistical learning:
   data mining, inference, and prediction, volume 2. Springer, 2009.

E. Hazan. Introduction to online convex optimization. Foundations and Trends in Optimization, 2
   (3-4):157–325, 2016.


                                                 29
L. He, M. Xia, and P. Henderson. What is in your safe data? identifying benign data that breaks
   safety. In First Conference on Language Modeling, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/
   forum?id=Hi8jKh4HE9.
Y. He, P. Li, Y. Hu, C. Chen, and K. Yuan. Subspace optimization for large language models with
   convergence guarantees. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning, 2025.
D. Hendrycks, C. Burns, S. Kadavath, A. Arora, S. Basart, E. Tang, D. Song, and J. Steinhardt.
  Measuring mathematical problem solving with the math dataset. NeurIPS, 2021.
E. J. Hu, Y. Shen, P. Wallis, Z. Allen-Zhu, Y. Li, S. Wang, L. Wang, W. Chen, et al. Lora: Low-rank
   adaptation of large language models. ICLR, 1(2):3, 2022.
P. Hu, J. Melkonian, W. Tang, H. Zhao, and J. W. Ma. GraSS: Scalable data attribution with gradient
   sparsification and sparse projection. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information
   Processing Systems, 2025a. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=o0HgWRmyY1.
Y. Hu, P. Hu, H. Zhao, and J. Ma. Most influential subset selection: Challenges, promises, and beyond.
   In A. Globerson, L. Mackey, D. Belgrave, A. Fan, U. Paquet, J. Tomczak, and C. Zhang, editors,
   Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 37, pages 119778–119810. Cur-
   ran Associates, Inc., 2024. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/
   2024/file/d8684e49752e06ac5e4b554b60ad212a-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Y. Hu, F. Wu, H. Ye, D. Forsyth, J. Zou, N. Jiang, J. W. Ma, and H. Zhao. A snapshot of influence: A
   local data attribution framework for online reinforcement learning. In The Thirty-ninth Annual
   Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2025b. URL https://openreview.
   net/forum?id=sYK4yPDuT1.
Hugging Face. Detoxifying a language model using ppo. https://huggingface.co/docs/trl/
  en/detoxifying_a_lm, 2023. TRL documentation (v0.17.0), accessed May 8, 2025.
M. F. Hutchinson. A stochastic estimator of the trace of the influence matrix for laplacian smoothing
  splines. Communications in Statistics-Simulation and Computation, 18(3):1059–1076, 1989.
H. Ivison, N. A. Smith, H. Hajishirzi, and P. Dasigi. Data-efficient finetuning using cross-task
  nearest neighbors. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023, pages
  9036–9061, 2023.
S. Iyer, X. V. Lin, R. Pasunuru, T. Mihaylov, D. Simig, P. Yu, K. Shuster, T. Wang, Q. Liu, P. S. Koura,
   et al. Opt-iml: Scaling language model instruction meta learning through the lens of generalization.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.12017, 2022.
C. Jiao, W. Gao, A. Raghunathan, and C. Xiong. On the feasibility of in-context probing for data
   attribution. In L. Chiruzzo, A. Ritter, and L. Wang, editors, Findings of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2025, pages 5140–5155, Albuquerque, New Mexico, Apr.
   2025. Association for Computational Linguistics. ISBN 979-8-89176-195-7. doi: 10.18653/v1/
   2025.findings-naacl.286. URL https://aclanthology.org/2025.findings-naacl.286/.
M. Joshi, E. Choi, D. S. Weld, and L. Zettlemoyer. Triviaqa: A large scale distantly supervised
  challenge dataset for reading comprehension. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the
 Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1601–1611, 2017.
P. W. Koh and P. Liang. Understanding black-box predictions via influence functions. In International
   conference on machine learning, pages 1885–1894. PMLR, 2017.
P.-N. Kung, F. Yin, D. Wu, K.-W. Chang, and N. Peng. Active instruction tuning: Improving cross-
   task generalization by training on prompt sensitive tasks. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference
   on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1813–1829, 2023.
T. Kwiatkowski, J. Palomaki, O. Redfield, M. Collins, A. Parikh, C. Alberti, D. Epstein, I. Polo-
   sukhin, J. Devlin, K. Lee, et al. Natural questions: a benchmark for question answering research.
   Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 7:453–466, 2019.


                                                  30
N. Lambert, J. Morrison, V. Pyatkin, S. Huang, H. Ivison, F. Brahman, L. J. V. Miranda, A. Liu,
  N. Dziri, S. Lyu, Y. Gu, S. Malik, V. Graf, J. D. Hwang, J. Yang, R. L. Bras, O. Tafjord, C. Wilhelm,
  L. Soldaini, N. A. Smith, Y. Wang, P. Dasigi, and H. Hajishirzi. Tülu 3: Pushing frontiers in open
  language model post-training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.15124, 2024.
G. Lan. First-order and stochastic optimization methods for machine learning, volume 1. Springer,
  2020.
K. Lange. MM optimization algorithms. SIAM, 2016.
K. Lange, D. R. Hunter, and I. Yang. Optimization transfer using surrogate objective functions.
  Journal of computational and graphical statistics, 9(1):1–20, 2000.
C. Ling, X. Zhao, J. Lu, C. Deng, C. Zheng, J. Wang, T. Chowdhury, Y. Li, H. Cui, X. Zhang, et al.
   Domain specialization as the key to make large language models disruptive: A comprehensive
   survey. ACM Computing Surveys, 58(3):1–39, 2025.
Z. Liu, T. D. Nguyen, T. H. Nguyen, A. Ene, and H. Nguyen. High probability convergence of
   stochastic gradient methods. In International conference on machine learning, pages 21884–21914.
   PMLR, 2023.
I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In International Conference on
   Learning Representations, 2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Bkg6RiCqY7.
K. Lu, H. Yuan, Z. Yuan, R. Lin, J. Lin, C. Tan, C. Zhou, and J. Zhou. #instag: Instruction tagging for
   analyzing supervised fine-tuning of large language models. In The Twelfth International Conference
   on Learning Representations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=pszewhybU9.
J. Mairal. Optimization with first-order surrogate functions. In International conference on machine
   learning, pages 783–791. PMLR, 2013.
S. Mishra, D. Khashabi, C. Baral, and H. Hajishirzi. Cross-task generalization via natural language
   crowdsourcing instructions. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for
   Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 3470–3487, 2022.
N. Muennighoff, S. Hongjin, L. Wang, N. Yang, F. Wei, T. Yu, A. Singh, and D. Kiela. Generative
  representational instruction tuning. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2024.
A. Muhamed, O. Li, D. Woodruff, M. Diab, and V. Smith. Grass: Compute efficient low-memory llm
   training with structured sparse gradients. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 14978–15003, 2024.
Y. Nesterov. Introductory lectures on convex optimization: A basic course, volume 87. Springer
   Science & Business Media, 2013.
M. Nikdan, V. Cohen-Addad, D. Alistarh, and V. Mirrokni. Efficient data selection at scale via
  influence distillation. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=E6ZdfjtoiX.
L. Ouyang, J. Wu, X. Jiang, D. Almeida, C. Wainwright, P. Mishkin, C. Zhang, S. Agarwal, K. Slama,
   A. Ray, et al. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. Advances in
   neural information processing systems, 35:27730–27744, 2022.
S. J. Pan and Q. Yang. A survey on transfer learning. IEEE Transactions on knowledge and data
   engineering, 22(10):1345–1359, 2009.

S. Pandya, P. Patel, B. D. Nord, M. Walmsley, and A. Ćiprijanović. Sidda: Sinkhorn dynamic domain
   adaptation for image classification with equivariant neural networks. Machine Learning: Science
   and Technology, 6(3):035032, 2025.
E. Perez, D. Kiela, and K. Cho. True few-shot learning with language models. Advances in neural
   information processing systems, 34:11054–11070, 2021.


                                                  31
G. Pruthi, F. Liu, S. Kale, and M. Sundararajan. Estimating training data influence by tracing gradient
   descent. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:19920–19930, 2020.

Qwen Team. Qwen3 technical report, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.09388.

P. Rajpurkar, J. Zhang, K. Lopyrev, and P. Liang. Squad: 100,000+ questions for machine compre-
   hension of text. In Proceedings of the 2016 conference on empirical methods in natural language
   processing, pages 2383–2392, 2016.

J. Rasley, S. Rajbhandari, O. Ruwase, and Y. He. Deepspeed: System optimizations enable training
   deep learning models with over 100 billion parameters. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD
   international conference on knowledge discovery & data mining, pages 3505–3506, 2020.

A. Renduchintala, T. Konuk, and O. Kuchaiev. Tied-lora: Enhancing parameter efficiency of lora
  with weight tying. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long
  Papers), pages 8694–8705, 2024.

J. Schulman and T. M. Lab. Lora without regret. Thinking Machines Lab: Connectionism, 2025. doi:
   10.64434/tml.20250929. https://thinkingmachines.ai/blog/lora/.

J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov. Proximal policy optimization
   algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.

S. Shalev-Shwartz and S. Ben-David. Understanding machine learning: From theory to algorithms.
   Cambridge university press, 2014.

Z. Shao, P. Wang, Q. Zhu, R. Xu, J. Song, X. Bi, H. Zhang, M. Zhang, Y. Li, Y. Wu, et al.
   Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language models. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2402.03300, 2024.

G. Sheng, C. Zhang, Z. Ye, X. Wu, W. Zhang, R. Zhang, Y. Peng, H. Lin, and C. Wu. Hybridflow: A
   flexible and efficient rlhf framework. arXiv preprint arXiv: 2409.19256, 2024.

Y. Sheng, S. Cao, D. Li, C. Hooper, N. Lee, S. Yang, C. Chou, B. Zhu, L. Zheng, K. Keutzer, J. E.
   Gonzalez, and I. Stoica. S-lora: Serving thousands of concurrent lora adapters. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2311.03285, 2023.

M. Sugiyama, M. Krauledat, and K.-R. Müller. Covariate shift adaptation by importance weighted
  cross validation. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 8(5), 2007.

R. Taori, I. Gulrajani, T. Zhang, Y. Dubois, X. Li, C. Guestrin, P. Liang, and T. B. Hashimoto.
  Stanford alpaca: An instruction-following llama model. https://github.com/tatsu-lab/
  stanford_alpaca, 2023.

R. Vershynin. High-Dimensional Probability: An Introduction with Applications in Data Science.
   Cambridge University Press, 2018.

B. Vidgen, T. Thrush, Z. Waseem, and D. Kiela. Learning from the worst: Dynamically generated
   datasets to improve online hate detection. In ACL, 2021.

L. von Werra, Y. Belkada, L. Tunstall, E. Beeching, T. Thrush, N. Lambert, S. Huang, K. Rasul, and
   Q. Gallouédec. Trl: Transformer reinforcement learning. https://github.com/huggingface/
   trl, 2020.

J. Wang, X. Lin, R. Qiao, C.-S. Foo, and B. K. H. Low. Helpful or harmful data? fine-tuning-free shap-
   ley attribution for explaining language model predictions. In Forty-first International Conference
   on Machine Learning, 2024a. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=WSpPC1Jm0p.

J. T. Wang, T. Wu, D. Song, P. Mittal, and R. Jia. Greats: Online selection of high-quality data
   for llm training in every iteration. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:
   131197–131223, 2024b.


                                                  32
Y. Wang, H. Ivison, P. Dasigi, J. Hessel, T. Khot, K. Chandu, D. Wadden, K. MacMillan, N. A.
   Smith, I. Beltagy, et al. How far can camels go? exploring the state of instruction tuning on open
   resources. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:74764–74786, 2023a.
Y. Wang, Y. Lin, X. Zeng, and G. Zhang. Multilora: Democratizing lora for better multi-task learning.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.11501, 2023b.
J. Wei, M. Bosma, V. Zhao, K. Guu, A. W. Yu, B. Lester, N. Du, A. M. Dai, and Q. V. Le. Finetuned
   language models are zero-shot learners. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
   2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=gEZrGCozdqR.
M. Xia, S. Malladi, S. Gururangan, S. Arora, and D. Chen. Less: Selecting influential data for targeted
  instruction tuning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 54104–54132. PMLR,
  2024a.
W. Xia, C. Qin, and E. Hazan. Chain of lora: Efficient fine-tuning of language models via residual
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.04151, 2024b.
B. Zhang and R. Sennrich. Root mean square layer normalization. Advances in neural information
   processing systems, 32, 2019.
L. Zhang, L. Zhang, S. Shi, X. Chu, and B. Li. Lora-fa: Memory-efficient low-rank adaptation for
   large language models fine-tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.03303, 2023.
P. Zhang, G. Zeng, T. Wang, and W. Lu. Tinyllama: An open-source small language model, 2024.
J. Zhao, Z. Zhang, B. Chen, Z. Wang, A. Anandkumar, and Y. Tian. Galore: Memory-efficient llm
   training by gradient low-rank projection. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages
   61121–61143. PMLR, 2024.
C. Zhou, P. Liu, P. Xu, S. Iyer, J. Sun, Y. Mao, X. Ma, A. Efrat, P. Yu, L. YU, S. Zhang, G. Ghosh,
   M. Lewis, L. Zettlemoyer, and O. Levy. LIMA: Less is more for alignment. In Thirty-seventh
   Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023. URL https://openreview.net/
   forum?id=KBMOKmX2he.




                                                  33
    A      Omitted Details from Section 2
    In this section, we briefly review the two low-dimensional parameter training methods used in this
    paper, LoRA and MeSO.
    To keep the discussion self-contained, we introduce only the notation needed here. In particular, for a
                                                            (l)   (l)         (l)     (l)
    linear layer l, we write its weight matrix as W (l) ∈ Rdout ×din , where din and dout denote the input
    and output dimensions, respectively. This notation is consistent with the main text, except that here
                        (l)      (l)  p
    we do not assume din = dout = d/L.

    A.1     LoRA
                                                                                                                          (l)
    LoRA [Hu et al., 2022] reparameterizes each linear layer l as W (l) + B (l) A(l) , where B (l) ∈ Rdout ×r
                      (l)                                                        (l) (l)
    and A(l) ∈ Rr×din are low-rank adapter matrices with rank r ≪ min(din , dout ). During training,
    the pretrained weight W (l) is kept frozen, and only the adapter parameters A(l) and B (l) are updated.
    We collectively refer to these trainable parameters as the adapters. Because the number of trainable
    parameters is much smaller than in full fine-tuning, LoRA substantially reduces memory usage:
    gradients and optimizer states (which can be several times larger than the gradients themselves) need
    to be stored only for the adapters rather than for the full weight matrix.

    A.2     MeSO

    MeSO [Zhao et al., 2024] maintains optimizer states in a compressed subspace Rκ rather than the full
                                                                           (l) (l)               (l) (l)
    parameter space Rd . At each layer l, MeSO uses a projection Π ∈ Rκ ×d (where d(l) = din dout
                                   (l)
                                                                                           P (l)
    is the number of parameters, κ is the compressed dimension for layer l, with d = l d and
    κ = l κ(l) ) to compress the vectorized gradient vec(g (l) ). The standard MeSO update is given in
         P
    Algorithm A.1.

    Algorithm A.1: Standard MeSO Training
    Data: Model θt , training data {zi }ni=1 , learning rate ηt , projections Π
    Result: Updated model parameters θt+1
            (l)    (l)
1 (ℓ, {ai , ei }l,i )←Forward(θt , {zi }ni=1 )
2 for l = L, . . . , 1 do
              (l)                       (l)
3      {∂ℓ/∂ei }ni=1 ←Backward(ℓ, θt )
         (l)           n     (l)    (l)
       ut ← n1 i=1 (∂ℓ/∂ei ) ⊗ ai
                  P
4
                     (l)   (l)
5      Release(ai , ∂ℓ/∂ei ) for all i
         (l)          (l)                                                                                               (l)
6      et ← Π(ut )
       u                                                                               // Compress to Rκ
        (l)       (l)          (l)
7      θt+1 ← θt − ηt · (Π⊤ u et )                                              // Back-project and update
                      (l)
8      Release(e   ut )
9 return θt+1


    Compared to LoRA, MeSO achieves memory savings through a different mechanism. LoRA reduces
    memory by restricting training to a small set of adapter parameters, so gradients and optimizer states
    are stored only for those parameters. In contrast, MeSO keeps the original parameterization of
    the model, but performs optimization in a low-dimensional subspace. As a result, gradient-related
    quantities such as optimizer states need only be maintained in the compressed space rather than in the
    full parameter space. This can lead to even greater memory savings, especially when the subspace
    dimension is smaller than the number of trainable parameters used by LoRA.6

    A.2.1         Subspace Refreshing
    We note that in many MeSO methods, the projection Π is periodically refreshed from Πold to Πnew
    to allow updating different subspaces, which requires transferring the optimizer’s momentum states
        6 Technically, it is possible to combine LoRA and MeSO. However, this leads to instability and is not a common practice.




                                                                34
to the new subspace. Prior works omit this nuance by setting the momentum states to zero for
simplicity [Zhao et al., 2024]. Here, we provide a strategy for AdamW [Loshchilov and Hutter, 2019]
to mitigate this.
                                                   (l)
First moment. For the first moment m̂old ∈ Rκ , the transfer is straightforward: back-project to
full space via Π⊤
                old , then forward-project via Πnew .

                                                         (l)
Second moment. For the second moment v̂old ∈ Rκ , a naive linear transformation is incorrect
since variance is a quadratic quantity. In our implementation we consider a diagonal covariance
approximation Σ̂old ≈ diag(v̂old ). This allows us to transform the second moment as:
                         v̂new = diag(M diag(v̂old )M ⊤ ) = (M ⊙ M )v̂old ,
where M = Πnew Π⊤    old . When M is too large to form explicitly, this diagonal can be esti-
                                                                            1
                                                                                PNprobe
mated stochastically via Hutchinson’s method [Hutchinson, 1989]: v̂new ≈ Nprobe   j=1   rj ⊙
                                                                 (l)
(M diag(v̂old )M ⊤ rj ) with Rademacher probes rj ∈ {−1,1}κ .

B     Omitted Details from Section 3
This section collects the technical results deferred from Section 3. Section B.1 derives the projection
formulation (Eq.(3)) from the majorization–minimization relaxation. Section B.2 derives both the
one-step majorization descent lemma (Lemma 3.1) that reduces bias–variance tradeoffs for each
method to MSE, and further provides the MSE bounds for all four methods, proving Proposition 3.3
and theorem 3.4.
For convenience, we restate all the assumptions used throughout the proofs.
Assumption (Target smoothness, Assumption 1). The target population loss L⋆ is β-smooth for
some β > 0.
Assumption (Bounded gradients, Assumption 2). There exists C > 0 such that ∥gi ∥ ≤ C for all
i ∈ [n].
Assumption (Sub-Gaussian√    noise, Assumption 3). Noise of target gradient ξ := ĝ⋆ − g⋆ is sub-
Gaussian with parameter σ/ m for some σ > 0.

B.1   Derivation of the Projection Formulation

By Assumption 1, the target loss admits the quadratic majorization
                                                                  βηt2
                          L⋆ (θt − ηt u) ≤ L⋆ (θt ) − ηt ⟨g⋆ , u⟩ +    ∥u∥2 .
                                                                   2
Minimizing the upper bound on the right-hand side over u ∈ Ut , dropping the constant L⋆ (θt ), and
substituting the target batch estimate ĝ⋆ for the unknown g⋆ yields
                                                                                2
                                           βηt     2                          ĝ⋆
              ut = arg max ⟨ĝ⋆ , u⟩ −         ∥u∥     ⇐⇒ ut ∈ arg min u −          ,
                      u∈Ut                  2                      u∈Ut       βηt
where the equivalence follows from completing the square:
                                                                       2
                                     βηt          βηt     1                    ∥ĝ⋆ ∥2
                       ⟨ĝ⋆ , u⟩ −       ∥u∥2 = −     u−     ĝ⋆           +
                                      2            2     βηt                   2βηt
Setting ηt = 1/β [Bottou et al., 2018] absorbs the scaling, giving Eq.(3).

B.2   Proof of the Bias–Variance Tradeoffs

We now prove the one-step majorization descent lemma (Lemma 3.1):
Lemma B.1. Assume Assumption 1. Fix θt and let 0 < ηt ≤ 1/β. For any u with E[∥u∥2 | θt ] < ∞,
                                                  ηt        ηt
                    E L⋆ (θt+1 ) | θt ≤ L⋆ (θt ) − ∥g⋆ ∥2 + MSE(u).
                                    
                                                  2         2

                                                   35
Proof. By Assumption 1 and linearity of expectation,
                                                                          βηt2
                E[L⋆ (θt+1 ) | θt ] ≤ L⋆ (θt ) − ηt ⟨g⋆ , E[u | θt ]⟩ +        E[∥u∥2 | θt ].
                                                                           2
Expanding MSE(u) = E[∥u∥2 | θt ] − 2⟨g⋆ , E[u | θt ]⟩ + ∥g⋆ ∥2 and rearranging gives
                                       1                 1        1
                   −⟨g⋆ , E[u | θt ]⟩ + E[∥u∥2 | θt ] = − ∥g⋆ ∥2 + MSE(u).
                                       2                 2        2
                                                                                  βη 2
Substituting and using ηt ≤ 1/β to drop the nonpositive remainder ( 2 t − η2t )E[∥u∥2 | θt ] ≤ 0
yields the result.

We are now ready to prove the bias–variance tradeoffs. Firstly, we prove Proposition 3.3 for the
Full-Training Update and the Target-Only Update.
Proposition 1 (Bias–variance tradeoffs). Fix θt and let ηt = 1/β. Then:

  (i) Full-Training Update. For Uttr = {ĝtr },
                                                         tr(Σtr )
                            B(Uttr ) = ∥gtr − g⋆ ∥2 +             ,       V(utr
                                                                             t ) = 0.
                                                            n

 (ii) Target-Only Update. For Ut⋆ = Rd ,
                                                                      tr(Σ⋆ )
                                     B(Ut⋆ ) = 0,        V(u⋆t ) =            .
                                                                        m

Proof. We prove this one by one.

  (i) Part (i) (Full-Training Update). Since utr
                                              t = ĝtr has mean gtr and covariance Σtr /n,
                                                                                                1
         MSE(utr                        2                                        2
              t ) = ∥E[ĝtr − g⋆ | θt ]∥ + tr(Cov(ĝtr − g⋆ | θt )) = ∥gtr − g⋆ ∥ +               tr(Σtr ).
                                                                                                n
      Furthermore, note that since Uttr = {ĝttr }, we also have B(Uttr ) = MSE(utr
                                                                                 t ).

 (ii) Part (ii) (Target-Only Update). With u⋆t = ĝ⋆ and ĝ⋆ − g⋆ has mean zero and covariance
      Σ⋆ /m,
                                                                             1
                    MSE(u⋆t ) = E[∥ĝ⋆ − g⋆ ∥2 | θt ] = tr(Cov(ĝ⋆ | θt )) =   tr(Σ⋆ ).
                                                                             m
      We conclude the proof by noting that B(Ut⋆ ) = 0 as Ut⋆ = Rd .



Finally, we conclude this section by proving Theorem 3.4.
Theorem (Bias–variance tradeoffs). Assume Assumptions 2 and 3 and fix θt and let ηt = 1/β. Then
for any k ∈ [n]:

  (i) Global Subset Update. For Utglob (k),
                                                             r
                                                   4Cσ                 
                                    V(uglob
                                       t    (k)) ≤ √             2 log 2 nk .
                                                         m

 (ii) Group-Wise Subset Update. For Utgrp (k; G) where G = {Gp }P
                                                                p=1 contains P groups,
                                                      r
                                                4CP σ         
                            V(ugrp
                                 t (k; G)) ≤ √          2 log 2 nk .
                                                  m

Moreover, Global Subset Update has a higher bias compared to Group-Wise Subset Update:
                                   B(Utgrp (k; G)) ≤ B(Utglob (k)).


                                                    36
Proof. We prove this one by one.

  (i) Part (i) (Global Subset Update). Fix k and write U := Utglob (k). Let ξ := ĝ⋆ − g⋆ . Define
                     u∗ := uglob
                            t    ∈ arg min∥u − ĝ⋆ ∥2 ,        u† ∈ arg min∥u − g⋆ ∥2 .
                                       u∈U                               u∈U

      By the projection property, ∥u∗ − ĝ⋆ ∥2 ≤ ∥u† − ĝ⋆ ∥2 . Expanding both sides via ĝ⋆ = g⋆ + ξ:
                       ∥u∗ − g⋆ ∥2 − 2⟨u∗ − g⋆ , ξ⟩ ≤ ∥u† − g⋆ ∥2 − 2⟨u† − g⋆ , ξ⟩.
      Rearranging, we get
               ∥u∗ − g⋆ ∥2 ≤ ∥u† − g⋆ ∥2 + 2⟨u∗ − u† , ξ⟩ ≤ ∥u† − g⋆ ∥2 + 4 sup |⟨ξ, u⟩|.
                                                                                    u∈U

      Taking expectation over randomness in U (i.e., over Bt ), we have
                                                                "                     #
                        MSE(uglob
                             t    ) ≤ E[∥u† − g⋆ ∥2 | θt ] + 4E         sup |⟨ξ, u⟩| θt ,
                                                                        u∈U

      The first term is simply B(U ) := E[inf u∈U ∥u − g⋆ ∥2 | θt ]. Hence, we have
                                                                  "              #
                        V(uglob
                           t    ) = MSE(uglob
                                         t    ) − B(U ) ≤ 4E sup |⟨ξ, u⟩| θt ,
                                                                    u∈U

      and it remains to bound E[supu∈U |⟨ξ, u⟩| | θt ]. By the sub-Gaussian assumption on the target
      noise, for each fixed u the random variable ⟨ξ, u⟩ is sub-Gaussian with parameter σ 2 ∥u∥2 /m,
      i.e.,                                                          !
                                                       λ2 σ 2    2
                          E exp(λ⟨ξ, u⟩) θt ≤ exp               ∥u∥ , ∀λ ∈ R.
                                                          2m
      By Assumption 2 and convexity, ∥u∥ ≤ G for all u ∈ U . The sub-Gaussian maximal
      inequality [Vershynin, 2018] states that for N mean-zero p      sub-Gaussian random variables
                                              2
      X1 , . . . , XN with common parameter τ   , E[maxi |Xi |] ≤   τ   2 log(2N ). Applying this with
      N = |U | ≤ nk and τ 2 = σ 2 G2 /m:
                       
                                  "               #
                                                      σG p
                                E sup |⟨ξ, u⟩| θt ≤ √           2 log(2|U |).
                                   u∈U                   m
      Taking expectation over ξ (i.e., over Bt⋆ ) finishes the proof.
 (ii) Part (ii) (Group-Wise Subset Update). The argument follows Part (i). Write U := Utgrp (k). By
      Assumption 2, each per-group component satisfies ∥u(p) ∥ ≤ G, so ∥u∥2 ≤ P G2 . Hence, the
      same argument yields                       √
                                       grp    4G P σ p
                                   V(ut ) ≤ √            2 log(2|U |).
                                                  m
      The cardinality bound follows from independence across groups: each group p independently
                                                       P                           P
      chooses St,p ⊂ [n] with |St,p | = k, so |U | ≤ nk . Substituting: log(2 nk ) = log 2 +
                                               √     q                      q
      P log nk ≤ P log(2 nk ) for P ≥ 1, so G P · 2P log(2 nk ) = GP 2 log(2 nk ).
                                                                                      




Simulation. Overall, which update dominates depends on the target batch size, the training–target
mismatch, and the feasible-set complexity. Figure 12 illustrates three representative regimes using
synthetic parameter choices to illustrate Theorem 3.4:

• Small mismatch. All four methods occupy distinct regimes. As m grows, the preferred update
  transitions from the Full-Training Update to the Global Subset Update, then to the Group-Wise
  Subset Update, and finally to the Target-Only Update.


                                                  37
• Moderate mismatch. The Group-Wise Subset Update dominates the Global Subset Update across
  a wider range of m, yielding a transition from the Full-Training Update to the Group-Wise Subset
  Update and then to the Target-Only Update.
• Large mismatch. The bias of full-training and Global Subset Updates is large enough that the
  Group-Wise Subset Update dominates even for relatively small m, before eventually giving way to
  the Target-Only Update when enough target data are available.

              glob
        utr
         t → ut    → ugrp
                      t   → u⋆
                             t       utr   grp
                                      t → ut   → u⋆
                                                  t                  ugrp
                                                                      t   → u⋆
                                                                             t


                                                                                                Uttr
                                                                                                Utglob
  MSE
                                                                                                Utgrp
                                                                                                Ut⋆
                  m                         m                            m
Figure 12: Illustration of MSE for each method as a function of target sample size m, according to
Theorem 3.4. Shaded regions indicate the method with the smallest MSE. As distribution mismatch
increases (left to right), Group-Wise Subset Update dominates over a wider range of m.



C       Omitted Details from Section 4

This section provides the details deferred from Section 4. First, Section C.1 fills the gap of Section 4.2,
where we discuss the tensor lifetime scheduling and also the scoring for general partition that we omit
in Section 4. Section C.2 then presents a naive implementation that avoids memory management issues
by using two passes. Section C.3 explains how to compress per-sample gradients efficiently without
materializing the full gradient. Section C.4 derives the exact computational and memory complexity
for each scoring method in Table 1. Section C.5 then describes how Layer-Wise Subset Update
integrates with LoRA and MeSO, covering gradient representations and optimizer state transfer.
Finally, Section C.6 discusses how data regularization extends beyond linear layers, including an
efficient scoring algorithm for embedding layers and the treatment of other non-linear modules,
specifically normalization layers.

Notation. Unlike in the main text where we focus primarily on layer-aligned partition G = {Gp }P   p=1
such that Gp contains parameters of layer(s), in this section, we consider general partitions such that
each group might contain a part of each layer and can also span across multiple layers. For the ease
of presentation, we overload the notation (p) and (l) , where the former always refers to group-wise
quantities, and the latter refers to layer-wise quantities.

C.1     General Partition

The one-pass tensor lifetime schedule presented in Section 4.2 focuses on layer-aligned partitions,
where each group Gp is a union of whole layers. Here, we discuss the additional complications that
arise for arbitrary partitions whose groups may split parameters within a single layer.

C.1.1     Layer-by-Layer Discipline

After the backward pass, all retained pairs (a(l) , ∂ℓ/∂e(l) ) are available. To stay within the memory
budget, score computation and gradient assembly must still proceed layer by layer. At each layer
l, we compute per-layer score contributions and accumulate them into the scores for each group. A
group Gp becomes resolvable once all layers intersecting Gp have been visited, at which point St,p
is determined. The update direction u(p) is then assembled from the per-sample gradients of the
selected samples at layers intersecting Gp , and the retained quantities at layer l are released once all
groups intersecting that layer have been resolved.


                                                   38
C.1.2    Non-Layer-Aligned Partitions

The layer-by-layer discipline introduces a tension between memory and recomputation for partitions
that do not align with the layer structure. When a group Gp spans multiple layers, St,p is not known
until all layers in the group have been scored. If the scoring strategy materializes per-sample gradients
 (l)
gi at each layer, these cannot in general be retained across the group’s full span without exceeding
the memory budget; they must be discarded after scoring, and recomputed from the retained pairs
                           (p)
(a(l) , ∂ℓ/∂e(l) ) when ut is assembled.

                                                                        (p)
Scoring. We now show how to compute the per-group scores si during the backward pass.
                                                                                                 (p)
A crucial observation is that the score decomposes linearly over parameter space, i.e., si =
P                                             th                                                     (p)
   q∈Gp gi,q · ĝ⋆,q where gi,q denotes the q entry of gi , similarly for ĝ⋆,q . Hence, computing si
reduces to computing the per-parameter score si,q := gi,q · ĝ⋆,q for each i ∈ [n] and q ∈ [d]. This is
                                                                   (p)
realized via layer-wise accumulation: for each p, we initialize si ← 0. Then during the backward
                                                               (l)                                   (l)
pass at layer l, we first materialize the per-sample gradient gi and the average target gradient ĝ⋆ ,
                                                         (l)    (l)
and obtain all per-parameter scores si,q by computing ĝ⋆ ⊙ gi ∈ Rd/L for all q belonging to layer
                             (p)      (p)  P
l. Finally, we accumulate si ← si + q∈Gp si,q , and continue the backward pass to layer l + 1.
Remark C.1. We highlight that the scoring methods discussed in Section 4.3, except for Direct,
                                                                        (l)    (l)
therefore can not handle general partition, as they do not materialize g⋆ and gi explicitly.

Update assembly. Recall that for layer-aligned partitions, we can break down the construction
     (p)
of ut into layers. Similarly, in the case of general partitions, we again follow the layer-by-layer
discipline, where for each layer, we first identify groups Gp that have non-empty intersections with
it, and for each of these groups, what are the corresponding parameters in the intersection. Then,
                                                (l)
we materialize all the per-sample gradients {gi }ni=1 of the entire layer, and resolve for each group
                                                                               (l)
by first computing the average over samples i ∈ St,p with sub-vectors of gi that corresponds to
parameters that belongs to the group.

C.2     Two Pass Implementation

Recall from Section 4.1 that in standard training, both a(l) and ∂ℓ/∂e(l) can be released as soon
                        (l)
as the batch gradient ĝtr is assembled, that is, once the update direction at layer l is decided. For
Group-Wise Subset Update, however, the update direction at each group p depends on St,p , and
St,p can only be determined after scoring all samples across every layer whose parameters intersect
Gp . Standard training releases the per-sample quantities needed for gradient assembly before St,p
is known. For Layer-Wise Subset Update, each group corresponds to a single layer, so St,p can be
determined after scoring all samples within that layer, and per-sample quantities can be released
immediately. For coarser partitions, however, a two-pass approach trades extra computation for
standard memory.

C.2.1    Separate Scoring and Gradient Passes
                                                                                            (p)
One solution is to use two passes. A first scoring pass accumulates per-group scores si layer by
layer during a standard forward-backward pass as described in Section
                                                                S      C.1. After St,p is determined,
a second gradient pass re-runs forward-backward on the union p St,p : at each layer l, the gradient
for each group p whose parameters intersect that layer is assembled from the samples in St,p , which
again follow the same strategy described in Section C.1 in the case of general partitions.
As a concrete instance, consider Global Subset Update, where all parameters form a single group so
                                                                       PL (l)
that St,p = St is global. The per-sample score decomposes as si = l=1 si , so the scoring pass
accumulates per-layer contributions into one global score per sample. The gradient pass simplifies to a
forward-backward on the k selected samples, at an additional cost of recomputation. GREATS [Wang
et al., 2024b] adopts this two-pass design; Algorithm C.1 presents the full pseudocode.


                                                   39
     Algorithm C.1: Global Subset Update (two-pass)
     Data: Model θt , training data {zi }ni=1 , target data {zj⋆ }m
                                                                  j=1 , learning rate ηt
     Result: Updated model parameters θt+1
1 /* Scoring pass                                                                                    */
        (l) (l)           ⋆(l) ⋆(l)                     n       ⋆ m
                                                                                                    √
2 (ℓ, {ai , ei }l,i ∪ {aj , ej }l,j )←Forward(θt , {zi }i=1 ∪ {zj }j=1 )                 // +O(2N T dL)
3 for l = L, . . . , 1 do
              (l)                ⋆(l)                   (l)
4      {∂ℓ/∂ei }ni=1 ∪ {∂ℓ/∂ej }m     j=1 ←Backward(ℓ, θt )
            (l)               (l)     (l)   ⋆(l)          ⋆(l) m
 5         si ←Score(ai , ∂ℓ/∂ei , {aj             , ∂ℓ/∂ej   }j=1 ) for each i ∈ [n]      // Section 4.3
                    (l)      (l)  ⋆(l)     ⋆(l)                                                    p
 6         Release(ai , ∂ℓ/∂ei , aj , ∂ℓ/∂ej ) for all i, j                             // −O(2N T d/L)
      PL (l)
7 si ← l=1 si for all i ∈ [n]                                                           // Global scores
                    n
8 St ←Select-S({si }i=1 , k)

9  /* Gradient pass on subset St                                                                     */
              (l)                                                                                   √
10 (ℓSt , {ai }l,i )←Forward(θ, {zi }i∈St )                                                // +O(kT dL)
11 for l = L, . . . , 1 do
                   (l)                      (l)                                    p               p
12     {∂ℓSt /∂ei }i∈St ←Backward(ℓSt , θt )                          // −O(kT          d/L) + O(kT d/L)
          (l)                   (l)     (l)
       ut ← k1 i∈St (∂ℓSt /∂ei ) ⊗ ai
                   P
13                                                                                             // +O(d/L)
                        (l)         (l)                                                            p
14     Release(ai , ∂ℓSt /∂ei ) for all i ∈ St                                           // −O(2kT d/L)
        (l)    (l)     (l)
15     θt+1 ← θt − ηt ut
                   (l)
16     Release(ut )                                                                           // −O(d/L)
17 return θt+1




     C.2.2        Compatibility with Memory-Saving Techniques
     The two-pass design is compatible with both activation checkpointing and gradient accumulation,
     since each pass independently preserves the standard memory profile. For activation checkpointing,
     when the partition does not align with the checkpointing schedule (i.e., some group Gp spans multiple
     checkpoint segments), the scoring pass computes per-group scores under standard checkpointing,
     releasing activations
                      S at segment boundaries, and the gradient pass performs a checkpointed forward-
     backward over p St,p . For gradient accumulation with rules that depend on global batch statistics
                                               S micro-batches to determine St,p for every group, and the
     (e.g., top-k), the scoring pass processes all
     gradient pass assembles gradients from p St,p , itself split into micro-batches if needed.

     C.3     Efficient Per-Sample Gradient Projection

     In this section, we provide a self-contained discussion on the state-of-the-art per-sample gradient
     compression [Hu et al., 2025a], which is used in both the MeSO integration and also the compressed
     scoring, where the scoring is computed using compressed gradients.

     C.3.1        Factorized Projection
     State-of-the-art gradient compressors [Hu et al., 2025a, Choe et al., 2025] consider a projection
     operator Π ∈ Rκ×d from dimension d := din dout to dimension κ ≪ d with a two-stage structure:
                                              Π = Pfinal (Pin ⊗ Pout ) ,

     where Pin ∈ Rκin ×din and Pout ∈ Rκout ×dout are the first-stage projections, Pin ⊗ Pout denotes their
     Kronecker product, and Pfinal ∈ Rκ×κin κout is a small second-stage projection.
     Remarkably, for any input vectors that admit such a factorized structure, the factorized projection
     can be computed efficiently without materializing the full Rκ×d representation of Π, and can directly
     operate on the input factors in Rdin and Rdout , enabling efficient forward and back-projection. This
     allows us to apply such a compressor to linear-layer gradients efficiently, as we will soon see.


                                                              40
Forward projection. For any input with outer-product structure b ⊗ a where a ∈ Rdin and b ∈ Rdout ,
the forward projection evaluates as
                                                                       
                           Π vec(b ⊗ a) = Pfinal vec (Pout b) ⊗ (Pin a) ,
requiring only two small matrix-vector products (Pin a ∈ Rκin and Pout b ∈ Rκout ) followed by the
                         without forming vec(b ⊗ a) ∈ Rd . By linearity, this extends to sums of
second-stage projection, P
outer products: for X = τ bτ ⊗ aτ ,
                                                                            !
                                                  X
                     Xe = Π vec(X) = Pfinal vec       (Pout bτ ) ⊗ (Pin aτ ) ,
                                                                  τ

where each term contributes a small outer product in Rκout ×κin .

Backward projection. For any vector x      e ∈ Rκ , the transpose map Π⊤ x  e ∈ Rd is equally efficient.
Let X ′ ∈ Rκout ×κin be the matrix obtained by reshaping (Pfinal )⊤ x
                                                                    e. The Kronecker structure gives
                                            Mat(Π⊤ x
                                                   e) = (Pout )⊤ X ′ Pin ,
a pair of small matrix multiplications, without forming the full matrix Π⊤ ∈ Rd×κ .

C.3.2    Per-Sample Gradient Compression
We now show how to apply this compressor to compress linear layers’ per-sample gradients.

Notation. For generality, we do not assume that each linear layer is square: specifically, the
                                (l)  (l)              (l) (l)
weight at layer l is W (l) ∈ Rdout ×din with d(l) := din dout , related to the vectorized form by θ(l) =
                                                                                         (l)     (l)  (l)
vec(W (l) ). Per-training-sample weight gradients are correspondingly denoted Gi ∈ Rdout ×din ,
         (l)           (l)
so that gi = vec(Gi ). Similarly for G⋆j for per-target-sample gradients. Let ⟨·, ·⟩ denote the
Frobenius inner product, i.e., the Euclidean inner product of the vectorized forms.

Efficient per-sample gradient compression. Recall that the per-sample weight gradient for sample
                                                       (l)                  (l)      (l)     d(l)
                                                              PT
zi at layer l is a sum of outer products over tokens: gi =       τ =1 (∂ℓ/∂ei,τ ) ⊗ ai,τ ∈ R      .
                                          (l)   (l)    (l)            (l)    (l)   (l)   (l)    (l)   (l)
Consider a compressor Π(l) := Pfinal (Pin ⊗ Pout ), with Pin ∈ Rκin ×din and Pout ∈ Rκout ×dout , and
  (l)         (l)      (l)   (l)
                    ×κin κout
Pfinal ∈ Rκ                     . Applying the forward projection gives the compressed per-sample gradient
                                                                               !
                                                  T
                               (l)    (l)
                                                X    
                                                         (l) (l)
                                                                 
                                                                      (l)  ∂ℓ          (l)
                             gei = Pfinal vec         Pin ai,τ ⊗ Pout (l)  ∈ Rκ .
                                                τ =1                      ∂ei,τ

We note that this can be computed directly from the cached activations and activation gradients,
                        (l)                           (l)    (l)       (l)
without materializing gi . With careful choice of Pin , Pout , and Pfinal , the per-sample memory
is O(κ ) instead of O(d ), and the per-token computational cost is O(κ(l) ) [Hu et al., 2025a],
       (l)                 (l)

so compressing all n samples across T tokens and L layers costs O(nT κ) in total where κ =
                                            (l) (l)        (l)   ⋆(l)        ⋆(l)
P (l)
   l κ . Later, we write this operation as Π (ai , ∂ℓ/∂ei , {aj , ∂ℓ/∂ej }) in Algorithm C.2
to emphasize that Π(l) operates on factorized inputs without materializing the full gradient.

C.4     Scoring Complexity

We derive the exact computational and memory complexity for each scoring method in Table 1. Every
addition and multiplication counts as one operation;
                                               p      memory is measured in scalar entries under fully
batched execution. Throughout, we let w = d/L to denote the layer width for brevity, N = n + m,
and all quantities carry a layer index (l) that we suppress for brevity.

C.4.1    Direct
Three steps:


                                                             41
                                                PT
1. Materialize n training gradient matrices gi = τ =1 (∂ℓ/∂ei,τ )⊗ai,τ . Each ⊗ Kronecker product
   costs w2 multiplications; summing T outer products element-wise adds (T − 1)w2 additions. Per
   sample: (2T − 1)w2 . Total: n(2T − 1)w2 .
                         1
                           P ⋆
2. Materialize ĝ⋆ = m       j gj . Same Kronecker-product accumulation for m target samples:
   m(2T − 1)w2 . Summing the m matrices: (m − 1)w2 additions. Scaling by 1/m: w2 mul-
   tiplications. Total: m(2T − 1)w2 + (m − 1)w2 + w2 = 2mT w2 .
3. Score. Each Frobenius inner product si = ⟨ĝ⋆ , gi ⟩ costs w2 multiplications + (w2 − 1) additions
   = (2w2 − 1) per sample. Total: n(2w2 − 1).

FLOPs.       n(2T − 1)w2 + 2mT w2 + n(2w2 − 1) = 2N T w2 + n(w2 − 1).

Memory.        n gradient matrices gi ∈ Rw×w plus ĝ⋆ : (n + 1)w2 .

C.4.2   Ghost Inner Product (GIP)
For each training-target pair (i,j):

1. Two T × T matrix products. Form the activation-gradient cross-correlation (∂ℓ/∂ei )⊤ (∂ℓ/∂e⋆j ) ∈
   RT ×T and the activation cross-correlation (ai )⊤ a⋆j ∈ RT ×T . Each entry is a dot product of
   w-vectors: w multiplications + (w − 1) additions = (2w − 1) per entry, T 2 (2w − 1) per matrix.
   Two such matrices: 2T 2 (2w − 1).
2. Frobenius inner product. Element-wise multiply and sum: T 2 multiplications + (T 2 −1) additions
   = (2T 2 − 1).
Per pair: 2T 2 (2w − 1) + (2T 2 − 1) = 4T 2 w − 1. Accumulating m pairs per training sample adds
(m − 1) additions and 1 multiplication (the 1/m scaling), giving m(4T 2 w − 1) + m = 4mT 2 w per
training sample.

FLOPs.       4nmT 2 w.

Memory.        Two T × T cross-correlation matrices per (i,j) pair, batched over all pairs: 2nmT 2 .

C.4.3   Per-Token Inner Product (PIP)
Two steps:

1. Materialize Ĝ⋆ . Identical to Step 2 of direct: 2mT w2 .
2. Score. For each training token (i,τ ): a matrix-vector product Ĝ⋆ ai,τ ∈ Rw costs w(2w − 1) (each
   of w entries is a dot product of w-vectors), then a dot product with ∂ℓ/∂ei,τ costs (2w − 1). Per
   token: w(2w − 1) + (2w − 1) = (w + 1)(2w − 1) = 2w2 + w − 1. Accumulating T tokens into
   si : T (2w2 + w − 1) + (T − 1) = 2T w2 + T w − 1 per sample. Total: n(2T w2 + T w − 1).

FLOPs.       2mT w2 + n(2T w2 + T w − 1) = 2N T w2 + n(T w − 1).

Memory.        Ĝ⋆ ∈ Rw×w plus the batched intermediates Ĝ⋆ A ∈ Rw×nT : w2 + nT w.

C.4.4   Compressed Gradient
Three steps:
                                                         (l)
1. Compress all N per-sample gradients to gei ∈ Rκ via the projection Π. The per-token cost
   depends on the Kronecker structure of Π (see Section C.3); the total is O(N T κ(l) ).
                                   1
                                     P ⋆
2. Aggregate target gradient ge⋆ = m    jgej . Summing m vectors of dimension κ(l) : (m − 1)κ(l)
   additions. Scaling by 1/m: κ(l) multiplications. Total: mκ(l) .
                                   g⋆ , gei ⟩ costs κ(l) multiplications + (κ(l) − 1) additions =
3. Score. Each inner product si = ⟨e
      (l)                          (l)
   (2κ − 1) per sample. Total: n(2κ − 1).


                                                   42
FLOPs.       O(N T κ(l) ) + (2n + m)κ(l) .

Memory.       n compressed training gradients plus ge⋆ : (n + 1)κ(l) .

C.5     Integrating LoRA and MeSO

The Dr. Post-Training framework is agnostic to the gradient representation at each layer, compos-
ing naturally with parameter-efficient and memory-efficient training methods. We now detail the
integration with LoRA and MeSO.

C.5.1    LoRA Integration
We adapt the same notation as in Section A.1. Since the two LoRA adapters B (l) and A(l) are
themselves linear maps, the per-sample gradients admit the same outer-product factorization as
full-parameter gradients:
                     T                                                      T
         (A,l)
                     X     ∂ℓ        (B,l)          (l)
                                                                (B,l)
                                                                            X     ∂ℓ        (A,l)        (l)
        Gi       =          (B,l)
                                  ⊗ ai,τ     ∈ Rr×din ,        Gi       =          (l)
                                                                                         ⊗ ai,τ     ∈ Rdout ×r .
                     τ =1 ∂ai,τ                                             τ =1 ∂ei,τ
                              (l)      (l)    (l)
The layer-wise scoring si = ⟨Ĝ⋆ , Gi ⟩ and gradient computation proceed identically to the full-
                                                     (l)   (l)                              (l) (l)
parameter case, but with the adapter dimension r(din + dout ) replacing the full dimension din dout .
This yields proportional reductions in both scoring and gradient computation cost. No modification
to the Layer-Wise Subset Update algorithm (Algorithm 4.3) is needed; LoRA simply changes the
gradient representation that the algorithm operates on.

C.5.2    MeSO Integration
We adapt the same notation as in Section A.2. We see that since MeSO only changes how the optimizer
update is applied, not how per-sample gradients are computed, data regularization integrates directly:
any scoring method from Section 4.3 (including the exact methods) can be used to determine St,p ,
and the optimizer then updates in the projected subspace using only the samples in St,p .

Compression. We adapt the Section C.3 for the computation of the compression required by MeSO.
Note that the compressed gradients are trivial to compute by directly applying the forward projection
in the factorized form. The tricky part is that when computing the momentum states transfer during
subspace refreshing, some of the input does not have the factorized structure.
Taking the first moment m̂old as an example, we see that the transformation requires computing
Πnew Π⊤old m̂old . We see that for the backward projection, we have an efficient implementation to
compute Π⊤   old m̂old . However, for the forward projection, it is unclear how to forward project this
general input Π⊤   old m̂old under Πnew . However, a simple application of the same trick (formally known
as the vec-trick), as discussed in the backward projection, resolves this problem and provides a way
to compute the forward projection on general input. We omit the details here for simplicity.

Scoring. For exact scoring, this is quite straightforward: we first compute the scores using one of
the exact scoring methods discussed in Section 4.3, discard all the intermediate quantities, solve for
St,p , and finally compute the compressed gradients for St,p . Since the exact scoring and compressed
gradient computations generally do not have overlapping computations, we do not need to consider
retaining any intermediate quantities to avoid recomputation, simplifying the memory management
issue.
On the other hand, for approximate scoring, we see that the compressed per-sample gradients that
MeSO computes for parameter updates can also be used for compressed scoring (Section 4.3.3) as an
                                                                 (l) (l)
additional optimization, so that the same compressed gradients gei , ge⋆ drive both alignment scoring
  (l)     (l) (l)
(si = ⟨eg⋆ , gei ⟩) and the optimizer update, avoiding redundant computation.
However, in this case, we note that managing memory for the compressed per-sample gradients
needed by the optimizer update and compressed scoring is again non-trivial: when there is a group
Gp that contains many layers, materializing all the per-sample compressed gradients across all layers
may still be memory-intensive and infeasible under a tight memory budget.


                                                          43
     Memory management for compressed scoring. We next discuss the memory-management aspect
     for MeSO with compressed gradients reused. Specifically, assume that we materialize all the O(n)
                                           (l)          (l)                                     (l)
     compressed per-sample gradients gei and also ge⋆ during the backward pass. Once gei is computed,
                       (l)                                (l)
     the activations ai and activation gradients ∂ℓ/∂ei can be released immediately, since the optimizer
                                                                                                       p
     update only requires averaging the compressed gradients in St,l . This replaces O(2nT d/L)
                     (l)           (l)                        (l)                                 p
     memory (for ai and ∂ℓ/∂ei ) with O(nκ(l) ) (for gei ), a net savings when κ(l) < T d/L, which
     holds in typical settings. Hence, it is generally possible to directly retain all the compressed gradients
     to avoid recomputation of the per-sample compressed gradients for the MeSO updates.
     For illustration, the pseudocode for this strategy in the case of Layer-Wise Subset Update is provided
     in Algorithm C.2, where the compressed gradients are further released at each layer once St,l is
     determined, so only one layer’s worth of per-sample compressed gradients is held at a time.

     Algorithm C.2: Layer-Wise Subset Update with MeSO
     Data: Model θt , training data {zi }ni=1 , target data {zj⋆ }m
                                                                  j=1 , learning rate ηt , projections Π
     Result: Updated model parameters θt+1
             (l)         ⋆(l)
 1 (ℓ, {ai }l,i , {aj }l,j )←Forward(θt , {zi }ni=1 ∪ {zj⋆ }m
                                                            j=1 )
 2 for l = L, . . . , 1 do
                (l)           ⋆(l)                         (l)
 3      {∂ℓ/∂ei }ni=1 , {∂ℓ/∂ej }m j=1 ←Backward(ℓ, θt )
            (l)          (l)           (l)          (l)
 4         gei ← Π(ai , ∂ℓ/∂ei ) ∈ Rκ for all i ∈ [n]                                     // Compress training
             ⋆(l)    ⋆(l)      ⋆(l)   (l)
 5         gej ← Π(aj , ∂ℓ/∂ej ) ∈ Rκ for all j ∈ [m]                                       // Compress target
                         (l)           (l)   ⋆(l)           ⋆(l)
 6         Release(ai , ∂ℓ/∂ei , aj                 , ∂ℓ/∂ej       ) for all i, j
             (l) 1
                   Pm ⋆(l)
 7         ge⋆ ← m   j=1 g
                         ej
            (l)        (l)       (l)
 8         si ← ⟨eg⋆ , gei ⟩ for each i ∈ [n]                               // Score via compressed gradients
                                (l)
 9         St,l ←Select-S({si }ni=1 , k)
             (l)              (l)
           et ← k1 i∈St,l gei
                   P
10         u                                                                              // Aggregate selected
                      (l)
11         Release(egi ) for all i
            (l)    (l)              (l)
12         θt+1 ← θt − ηt · (Π⊤ u  et )                                             // Back-project and update
                       (l)
13         Release(eut )
14   return θt+1


     C.6     Beyond Linear Layers

     The system design in Section 4 develops scoring and selection exclusively for linear layers (e.g.,
     nn.Linear in PyTorch), which account for the vast majority of trainable parameters in standard
     transformer architectures. A transformer model, however, also contains other trainable modules—
     token embeddings (nn.Embedding) and normalization layers (nn.LayerNorm, nn.RMSNorm)—
     whose treatment we now discuss.

     C.6.1         Embedding Layers
     The token embedding layer maps each input token index xi,τ ∈ [V ] to a dense vector via a lookup:
     outputi,τ = W [xi,τ ], where W ∈ RV ×D is the embedding matrix, V is the vocabulary size, and D
     is the embedding dimension. Unlike a linear layer, whose per-sample gradient is a sum of dense outer
     products, the embedding gradient is sparse: writing δi,τ := ∂ℓi /∂outputi,τ ∈ RD for the activation
     gradient at position τ , the per-sample weight gradient is
                                                          T
                                                          X
                                                Gi =             exi,τ ⊗ δi,τ ∈ RV ×D ,
                                                          τ =1

                             V
                                                                                                  P
     where exi,τ ∈ R is the one-hot indicator for token xi,τ . Row v of Gi equals                   τ : xi,τ =v δi,τ , and
     all other rows are zero.


                                                                       44
Efficient scoring via lookup. This sparsity enables a scoring algorithm that avoids materializing
any per-sample gradient matrix. The target embedding gradient is
                                              m     T
                                        1 XX
                                Ĝ⋆ =                    ⋆
                                                  ex⋆ ⊗ δj,τ ∈ RV ×D ,
                                        m j=1 τ =1 j,τ

computable in O(mT D) via index_add (scatter-accumulate over token indices). The per-sample
alignment score then simplifies as follows:
                                              V                           T
                    (emb)
                                              X                           X
                   si       = ⟨Gi , Ĝ⋆ ⟩ =         ⟨Gi [v], Ĝ⋆ [v]⟩ =       ⟨δi,τ , Ĝ⋆ [xi,τ ]⟩,
                                              v=1                         τ =1

where the last equality follows from Gi [v] ̸= 0 only for v ∈ {xi,τ }τ . Each term is a table lookup
of Ĝ⋆ at index xi,τ followed by a dot product with δi,τ , both O(D) operations. Summing over T
tokens gives O(T D) per sample, and O(nT D) across all n training samples. Including the cost of
constructing Ĝ⋆ , the total is O(N T D) FLOPs with O(V D) memory for storing Ĝ⋆ .

Comparison with linear layer scoring. The embedding scoring algorithm is the natural analogue
of the reduced ghost inner product for linear layers (Section 4.3). For a linear layer, the reduced √
                                                                                                    ghost
           (l)              (l)     (l) (l)                                              (l) (l)
evaluates si = τ (∂ℓ/∂ei,τ )⊤ Ĝ⋆ ai,τ , which requires a matrix-vector product Ĝ⋆ ai,τ ∈ R d/L
                 P
at each token. For the embedding layer, the “input” is a one-hot vector exi,τ , so the matrix-vector
product Ĝ⋆ exi,τ = Ĝ⋆ [xi,τ ] reduces to a single row lookup, eliminating the O(D) factor from
the matrix-vector multiply. In practice, the activation gradients δi,τ are already available during
backpropagation (they are the upstream gradient flowing into the embedding layer), so scoring adds
only the table-lookup and dot-product cost per token.

Gradient assembly.     After selection, the weight gradient for the selected subset S is assembled as
           1
G(emb) = |S|
             P
                i∈S Gi , which is a sparse accumulation computable in O(|S∥T D) via index_add,
matching the cost of standard embedding gradient computation on a batch of size |S∥.

C.6.2   Normalization Layers

Normalization layers (e.g., LayerNorm [Ba et al., 2016], RMSNorm [Zhang and Sennrich, 2019])
contain a small number of trainable parameters—a scale vector γ ∈ RD and optionally a bias
β ∈ RD —contributing O(D) parameters per normalization layer versus O(D2 ) for each linear layer.
These parameters are not covered by the data regularization hooks and receive their gradients from
the full batch via standard autograd, i.e., they are effectively trained under Full-Training Update
(U = {ĝtr }). In a typical transformer, the total parameter count of all normalization layers is
negligible relative to that of the linear layers.

Summary. In our implementation, only nn.Linear modules within the transformer blocks are
hooked for data-regularized training. The embedding layer admits efficient per-sample scoring via
the lookup-based algorithm above, though it is not hooked in our current experiments (in LoRA
and MeSO settings, the embedding is frozen; in the full-parameter setting, the lm_head, which is
often weight-tied with the embedding, is included as a linear layer). Normalization layers are trained
with the full batch. Since linear layers account for the vast majority of trainable parameters, this
design covers the parameters that matter most while maintaining compatibility with standard training
infrastructure.


D    Omitted Details from Section 5

In this section, we provide all the omitted details for all experiment settings, including SFT, RLHF,
and RLVR.


                                                         45
D.1     Computing Resources

Our experiments are conducted on the NCSA Delta cluster.7 SFT, RLHF, and benchmark experi-
ments run on nodes equipped with a single AMD EPYC 7763 CPU @ 2.45GHz (64 cores) and four
NVIDIA A40 GPUs (48 GB GDDR6 each). RLVR experiments run on nodes with dual Intel Xeon
Platinum 8558 CPUs (96 cores total) and eight NVIDIA H200 GPUs (141 GB HBM3 each).

D.2     Supervised Fine-Tuning

We now provide the missing details of the SFT experiments in Section 5.1, including details on
datasets, training configurations, data regularization, and the case study.

D.2.1    Datasets
We consider four general/target pairs:
• alpaca8 [Taori et al., 2023] (CC BY-NC 4.0 license)/samsum9 [Gliwa et al., 2019] (CC BY-NC-
  ND 4.0 license). Single-turn instruction-following/dialogue summarization. We randomly sample
  40% of the alpaca training pool per seed (∼ 20.8k examples).
• less-mix [Xia et al., 2024a]/tydiqa10 [Clark et al., 2020] (Apache-2.0 license). Heterogeneous
  instruction mixture/multilingual extractive QA. We randomly sample 0.5% of less-mix per seed
  (∼ 9.8k examples).
• triviaqa11 [Joshi et al., 2017]/nq_open12 [Kwiatkowski et al., 2019] (CC BY-SA 3.0 license).
  Closed-book TriviaQA QA pairs (rc.nocontext, ∼ 138k examples)/closed-book Natural Ques-
  tions evaluation. We randomly sample 5% of the triviaqa training pool per seed (∼ 8.9k
  examples).
• less-mix [Xia et al., 2024a]/squad13 [Rajpurkar et al., 2016] (CC BY-SA 4.0 license). Same
  training pool as the tydiqa setting, with the target task replaced by SQuAD reading-comprehension
  answers without context. 0.5% sampling rate as above.
For each target task we hold out 16 samples for data regularization, 500 samples for in-training
perplexity tracking, and report the final-checkpoint downstream metric (Rouge-L for samsum; F1
for tydiqa, nq_open, and squad) on a separate 500-sample test split. Llama-3.2-1B-Base ships
without a chat template, so we install an open-instruct-style fallback (⟨user⟩/⟨assistant⟩ plaintext
markers) before tokenization, with the loss computed only on assistant-content tokens.

D.2.2    Training Configurations
All models are trained with standard supervised fine-tuning using next-token prediction on formatted
instruction–response pairs. Across the four settings, we report results for (i) full-parameter fine-tuning,
(ii) LoRA fine-tuning, and (iii) MeSO; alpaca/samsum reports all three fine-tuning methods, while
less-mix/tydiqa, triviaqa/nq_open, and less-mix/squad report LoRA only. All methods use
the same number of optimization steps within each dataset pair and the same effective batch size.
We use AdamW [Loshchilov and Hutter, 2019] with β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999, weight decay 0, a linear
learning-rate schedule with 3% warmup, batch size 8, maximum sequence length 512, and train for
1 epoch. Training uses bfloat16 precision and FlashAttention-2. For the learning rate, we follow
Grattafiori et al. [2024], where we use 10−5 for full-parameter fine-tuning and MeSO, and 10−4 (10
times scaling [Schulman and Lab, 2025]).
The number of training steps is determined by the 1-epoch budget on the sampled training pool:
∼ 2600 for alpaca/samsum, ∼ 1225 for less-mix/tydiqa and less-mix/squad, and ∼ 1107 for
triviaqa/nq_open. We log evaluation perplexity at ∼ 100 equally spaced steps across the trajectory
in all four settings.
   7 https://docs.ncsa.illinois.edu/systems/delta/en/latest/index.html
   8 https://huggingface.co/datasets/tatsu-lab/alpaca
   9 https://huggingface.co/datasets/knkarthick/samsum
  10 https://huggingface.co/datasets/google-research-datasets/tydiqa
  11 https://huggingface.co/datasets/mandarjoshi/trivia_qa
  12 https://huggingface.co/datasets/google-research-datasets/nq_open
  13 https://huggingface.co/datasets/rajpurkar/squad




                                                   46
For LoRA, we use rank r = 8, scaling factor α = 16, dropout 0.1, and apply adapters to all linear
layers (the full Q/K/V/O attention projections and the gate/up/down MLP projections). For MeSO,
                                                                                                 (l)
we use the gradient compressor described in Section C.3.2 with a Gaussian projector for both Pout
      (l)
and Pin of dimension 512 (i.e., the total per-layer compression dimension is κ(l) = 512 × 512), and
                             (l)
no second-stage projector (Pfinal = I), refreshing the subspace every 200 steps.

D.2.3    Data Regularization
Data regularization is guided by a small held-out target set of 16 samples (nval = 16). At each
training step, we form a merged batch of n = 8 training samples and m = 1 target sample (resampled
per step from the held-out target pool), and score candidate training examples bycompressed scoring
(Section 4.3.3) with gradient compressors of dimension κ(l) = 64 × 64 for each layer, including
MeSO. Note that under MeSO, the score compression and update compression are done using
different compressors (64 × 64 for scoring vs. 512 × 512 for updates), allowing a fair comparison
across fine-tuning methods.
We solve St (or St,l in the case of Layer-Wise Subset Update) by the top-k strategy, where we
consider a retaining rate of 50% (i.e., k = 4 out of batch size n = 8).

D.2.4    Case Study
Figure 13 extends the score analysis from Section 5.1.3 to the three QA settings. The same qualitative
pattern holds across all four settings: a single down_proj layer at an early block (block 0 or 1)
produces scores 22×–38× larger than the second-largest layer type at the same block, and the global
ranking is consequently dominated by that layer. Q and K projections, by contrast, retain near-zero
correlation (ρ ≲ 0.3) with the global subset ranking across all four settings, confirming that the
score-magnitude skew is not specific to any particular general/target pair or training-pool composition.

D.3     Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback

We now provide the missing details of the RLHF experiments in Section 5.2, including details on
datasets, libraries, training configurations, and data regularization.

D.3.1    Libraries and Datasets
We implement PPO-based RLHF using TRL14 [von Werra et al., 2020] (Apache-2.0 license) and
sample prompts from real-toxicity-prompts15 [Gehman et al., 2020] (Apache-2.0 license). For
rewards, we use the LFTW R4 Target toxicity detector16 [Vidgen et al., 2021], and we evaluate toxi-
city using da-electra-hatespeech-detection17 . We note that this experimental setup largely
follows the official example provided from TRL,18 but with a newer TRL version.

D.3.2    Training Configurations
For each prompt, the policy generates a continuation of up to 30 tokens, scored by the reward model;
PPO updates maximize reward while penalizing deviation from a frozen reference policy via an
adaptive KL penalty. We use 4 PPO epochs with mini-batch size 4, rollout batch size 256, learning
rate 10−5 (policy) and 5 × 10−4 (value head), linear schedule with 3% warmup, and no weight decay.
LoRA is applied with rank 16, α = 32, and dropout 0.05. The PPO surrogate uses clipping range 0.2
for both policy and value, value function coefficient 0.1, discount factor γ = 1.0, and GAE parameter
λ = 0.95. The KL penalty is initialized at 0.02 and adapted via an AdaptiveKLController with
horizon target 70.0, using the k1 estimator; early stopping is enabled when the per-step KL exceeds
1.5 × 0.3. Evaluation is performed every PPO step by generating continuations for 500 held-out
prompts (batch size 256) and reporting the mean predicted toxicity.
  14 https://huggingface.co/docs/trl/index
  15 https://huggingface.co/datasets/allenai/real-toxicity-prompts
  16 https://huggingface.co/facebook/roberta-hate-speech-dynabench-r4-target
  17 https://huggingface.co/alexandrainst/da-hatespeech-detection-base
  18 https://huggingface.co/docs/trl/v0.4.7/en/detoxifying_a_lm




                                                  47
                      (a) less-mix/tydiqa: magnitude                                     (b) less-mix/tydiqa: correlation
                                                                                  1.0
                101                                                               0.8



                                                                   Rank Correlation
                                    29×



Average Score
                                                                                                      = 0.90
                100                                                               0.6
                                                                                  0.4
            10 1
                                                                                  0.2
            10 2                                                                  0.0
                      0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112131415                                  0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
                                  Transformer Block                                                  Transformer Block
                      (c) triviaqa/nq_open: magnitude                                   (d) triviaqa/nq_open: correlation
                                                                                  1.0
                102
                                                                                  0.8



                                                                   Rank Correlation
                                    38×



Average Score
                                                                                                      = 0.94
                101                                                               0.6
                100                                                               0.4
                                                                                  0.2
            10 1
                                                                                  0.0
                      0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112131415                                  0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
                                  Transformer Block                                                  Transformer Block
                       (e) less-mix/squad: magnitude                                      (f) less-mix/squad: correlation
                102                                                               1.0
                                                                                  0.8



                                                                   Rank Correlation
                101               22×



Average Score
                                                                                                      = 0.91
                                                                                  0.6
                100
                                                                                  0.4
            10 1                                                                  0.2
            10 2                                                                  0.0
                      0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112131415                                  0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
                                  Transformer Block                                                  Transformer Block
                       Q [Attn]         K [Attn]   V [Attn]   O [Attn]                  Gate [MLP]       Up [MLP]   Down [MLP]

  Figure 13: Per-layer scores on the three QA-only settings (full-parameter SFT trace), analo-
  gous to Figure 8. Magnitude ratios at the dominant block: 22× (less-mix/tydiqa), 29×
  (triviaqa/nq_open), 38× (less-mix/squad). Spearman ρ of the dominant down_proj layer
  with the global ranking: 0.91, 0.94, and 0.90 respectively, while Q and K projections remain near
  zero (ρ ≲ 0.3) in all three settings.




                                                                 48
D.3.3    Data Regularization
In this setting, we consider exact scoring with the per-token inner product introduced in Section 4.3.2.
Two types of “target set” are considered: (i) the same rollout batch (self-referencing), or (ii) new roll-
outs generated from a held-out target set of 1024 prompts, processed in batches of 256. Furthermore,
we consider two target loss functions for the target signals: (i) reward-weighted log-probability, and
(ii) the pre-clip PPO surrogate loss (i.e., the training objective before clipping).
Finally, we solve St (or St,l in the case of Layer-Wise Subset Update) via negative score filtering,
where at each PPO step, samples (i.e., rollouts) with negative scores are dropped from the update.

D.4     Reinforcement Learning with Verifiable Rewards

We now provide the missing details of the RLVR experiments in Section 5.3, including details on
datasets, libraries, training configurations, and data regularization.

D.4.1    Libraries and Datasets
We use the Verl framework19 [Sheng et al., 2024] (Apache-2.0 license) to train on the MATH
dataset20 [Hendrycks et al., 2021] (MIT license). We note that this experimental setup largely
follows the official example provided from Verl,21 with different models and datasets.

D.4.2    Training Configurations
Each training sample is a math problem; the model generates 8 candidate solutions and receives a
verifiable reward from exact-match checking against the ground-truth answer. The policy is optimized
using GRPO [Shao et al., 2024] with training batch size 128, mini-batch size 32, micro-batch size
2 per GPU, KL coefficient 0.001 (low-variance estimator), learning rate 10−6 , maximum prompt
length 1024, and maximum response length 2048. Gradient checkpointing is enabled. We train for 3
epochs and evaluate every 3 steps. All other settings follow the default Verl configuration.

D.4.3    Data Regularization
We instantiate the data regularization framework as in-run cross-validation with again the per-token
inner product introduced in Section 4.3.2: at each step, a random subset drawn from a pool of
held-aside training prompts serves as the target batch, and the reward-weighted log-probability on the
target rollouts provides the target signal. Then, negative score filtering is applied to the training batch
based on scores with this target, dropping all samples with negative alignment scores. The target
pool contains 512 prompts sampled from the training set, with target batch size 64; target rollouts are
regenerated at every step using the current policy.

D.5     System Efficiency

We now provide additional benchmarking results that we omitted in Section 5.4, where specifically,
we provide a comparison with the two-pass implementation of Global Subset Update (named Subset
(2P)) as introduced in Section C.2. Tables 7 and 8 provide per-component breakdowns (ms) for the
three benchmark models on a single A40 GPU across two batch configurations, without and with
activation checkpointing, respectively. The format mirrors Table 3; for Subset (2P), the scoring and
gradient passes are shown separately. Table 9 consolidates the corresponding peak GPU memory.




  19 https://github.com/verl-project/verl
  20 https://github.com/hendrycks/math
  21 https://github.com/verl-project/verl/blob/65eb5a15058d73ef54064092222b7af67d658241/

examples/grpo_trainer/run_qwen3-8b.sh


                                                    49
Table 7: Per-step component breakdown (ms) on a single A40 GPU across three models and two
batch configurations (m = 1, k = n/2, compressed scoring).


        (a) S MOL LM2-360M, n = 8, T = 512.                                                              (b) S MOL LM2-360M, n = 2, T = 1024.
              Full-Training   Layer-Wise Subset   Global Subset (1P)   Global Subset (2P)                     Full-Training   Layer-Wise Subset   Global Subset (1P)   Global Subset (2P)
Component                                                              Score       Grad          Component                                                             Score       Grad
Forward           78.4               88.6                88.9           88.7       46.5          Forward          46.9               61.5                61.4          61.3        47.0
Backward         155.7              234.0               193.0          161.5       81.4          Backward         83.1              229.0               173.8          139.9       72.2
  a.grad          32.5               34.2                33.3           33.4       16.1            a.grad         16.1              27.0                 26.6           26.7       14.2
  scoring          —                 43.8                22.5           22.5        —              scoring         —                62.7                 36.8           33.6        —
  w.grad          27.5               43.5                30.7            —         15.5            w.grad         15.5              48.1                 24.0            —         12.5
  autograd        95.6              112.7               106.5          105.6       49.8            autograd       51.6              91.2                 86.5           79.6       45.5
Optimizer         26.6               26.6               26.6             —         27.8          Optimizer        26.6               26.6                26.6            —         27.8
Total             261            349 (+34.0%)         309 (+18.4%)         405 (+55.2%)          Total            157            317 (+102.5%)        262 (+67.2%)        348 (+122.4%)




        (c) T INY L LAMA -1.1B, n = 8, T = 512.                                                          (d) T INY L LAMA -1.1B, n = 2, T = 1024.
              Full-Training   Layer-Wise Subset   Global Subset (1P)   Global Subset (2P)                     Full-Training   Layer-Wise Subset   Global Subset (1P)   Global Subset (2P)
Component                                                              Score       Grad          Component                                                             Score       Grad
Forward          155.5              168.4               167.9          168.2       82.3          Forward          83.8              121.7               121.7          121.6       48.8
Backward         312.5              352.8               344.2          270.0      163.5          Backward        166.5              241.3               233.5          188.9       91.8
  a.grad          93.3               96.6                96.6           96.6      48.8             a.grad        48.9                67.8                67.7           67.7       27.7
  scoring          —                 35.6                31.3           31.3        —              scoring         —                 23.4                20.1           20.1        —
  w.grad          91.7               77.2                73.4            —        47.6             w.grad        47.5                47.5                43.7            —         26.1
  autograd       127.6              143.4               142.9          142.1      67.1             autograd      70.1               102.6               101.9          101.1       38.0
Optimizer         81.2               81.3               81.2             —         81.2          Optimizer        81.2               81.2                81.2            —         81.2
Total             549             602 (+9.7%)         593 (+8.0%)          765 (+39.3%)          Total            332            444 (+34.0%)         436 (+31.6%)         532 (+60.6%)




             (e) L LAMA -3.2-3B, n = 8, T = 512.                                                          (f) L LAMA -3.2-3B, n = 2, T = 1024.
              Full-Training   Layer-Wise Subset   Global Subset (1P)   Global Subset (2P)                     Full-Training   Layer-Wise Subset   Global Subset (1P)   Global Subset (2P)
Component                                                              Score       Grad          Component                                                             Score       Grad
Forward          343.3              387.5               390.0          388.9      183.1          Forward         184.9              264.0               265.3          264.8      101.0
Backward         828.2              825.6               820.2          583.5      427.3          Backward        431.8              509.7               503.5          393.0      202.5
  a.grad         228.9              255.8               256.8          256.9      118.1            a.grad        118.0              165.4               166.3          166.0      63.7
  scoring         —                  49.7                45.4           45.3       —               scoring        —                  34.6                31.4           31.4       —
  w.grad         342.2              233.1               235.4            —        174.6            w.grad        174.4              108.2               109.1            —        63.2
  autograd       257.1              287.1               282.6          281.4      134.6            autograd      139.4              201.5               196.6          195.6      75.6
Optimizer        235.4              235.4               235.5            —        235.5          Optimizer       235.6              235.4               235.5            —        235.5
Total             1407           1449 (+3.0%)        1446 (+2.8%)         1818 (+29.2%)          Total            852            1009 (+18.4%)       1004 (+17.8%)        1197 (+40.4%)




                                                                                            50
Table 8: Per-component breakdown (ms) with activation checkpointing on a single A40 GPU across
three models and two batch configurations (m = 1, k = n/2, compressed scoring). Format mirrors
Table 7.


         (a) S MOL LM2-360M, n = 8, T = 512.                                                                   (b) S MOL LM2-360M, n = 2, T = 1024.
              Full-Training      Layer-Wise Subset    Global Subset (1P)    Global Subset (2P)                        Full-Training   Layer-Wise Subset    Global Subset (1P)   Global Subset (2P)
Component                                                                   Score        Grad         Component                                                                 Score         Grad
Forward           88.2                 109.7                 107.7            98.9        73.4        Forward             63.9               77.0                 77.1           69.6       72.3
Backward         249.0                 311.4                 297.1           258.6       134.7        Backward           135.4              305.6                252.8          218.8      148.0
  a.grad          40.7                  41.0                  40.8            40.9       20.9           a.grad           20.8                34.5                 34.1           34.1       18.5
  scoring          —                    33.4                  26.6            26.5         —            scoring            —                 61.9                 39.6           39.0        —
  w.grad          36.2                  43.3                  37.5             —         20.0           w.grad           20.0                52.4                 25.7            —         15.3
  autograd       172.0                 193.8                 192.1           191.1       93.8           autograd         94.6               156.8                153.3          145.7      114.2
Optimizer         26.8                  26.8                 26.8              —          27.8        Optimizer           26.9               26.8                 26.8            —         28.0
Total                364            448 (+23.0%)          432 (+18.6%)           593 (+63.0%)         Total               226            409 (+81.0%)          357 (+57.8%)        537 (+137.3%)




        (c) T INY L LAMA -1.1B, n = 8, T = 512.                                                               (d) T INY L LAMA -1.1B, n = 2, T = 1024.
              Full-Training      Layer-Wise Subset    Global Subset (1P)    Global Subset (2P)                        Full-Training   Layer-Wise Subset    Global Subset (1P)   Global Subset (2P)
Component                                                                   Score        Grad         Component                                                                 Score         Grad
Forward          154.9                 167.4                 167.1           174.2        82.2        Forward             84.0              121.1                121.0          128.9       50.2
Backward         453.6                 504.3                 495.9           421.8       238.3        Backward           242.8              351.5                343.8          299.3      136.9
  a.grad          93.3                  96.8                  96.7            96.8       48.9           a.grad            49.0               67.8                 67.8           67.8      27.7
  scoring          —                    35.5                  31.3            31.3         —            scoring            —                 23.3                 20.2           20.0        —
  w.grad          91.8                  77.1                  73.4             —         47.6           w.grad            47.6               47.4                 43.6            —        26.1
  autograd       268.5                 294.9                 294.5           293.6       141.7          autograd         146.3              213.0                212.2          211.4      83.1
Optimizer         81.2                  81.3                  81.3             —          81.2        Optimizer           81.3               81.2                 81.2            —         81.2
Total                690             753 (+9.2%)           744 (+7.9%)           998 (+44.7%)         Total               408            554 (+35.7%)          546 (+33.8%)         697 (+70.7%)




             (e) L LAMA -3.2-3B, n = 8, T = 512.                                                                 (f) L LAMA -3.2-3B, n = 2, T = 1024.
              Full-Training      Layer-Wise Subset    Global Subset (1P)    Global Subset (2P)                        Full-Training   Layer-Wise Subset    Global Subset (1P)   Global Subset (2P)
Component                                                                    Score       Grad         Component                                                                 Score         Grad
Forward           389.2                437.4                 438.4           437.9       216.5        Forward            214.3              303.2                302.4          302.5      125.9
Backward         1233.5               1279.1                1267.8          1012.7       645.3        Backward           653.6              829.3                819.4          693.2      331.1
  a.grad          269.4               299.4                  299.3          299.3        136.0          a.grad           136.0              198.4                198.3          198.4       75.0
  scoring          —                   60.2                   54.7           54.8         —             scoring           —                  38.0                 33.8           33.7        —
  w.grad          371.6               254.9                  254.0            —          189.5          w.grad           189.5              125.6                124.9            —         76.2
  autograd        592.5               664.6                  659.7          658.6        319.8          autograd         328.1              467.4                462.3          461.1      179.8
Optimizer         236.8                236.8                 236.8            —          236.8        Optimizer          236.8              236.8                236.8            —        236.8
Total             1860              1953 (+5.0%)          1943 (+4.5%)          2549 (+37.1%)         Total               1105           1369 (+24.0%)        1359 (+23.0%)        1689 (+52.9%)




Table 9: Peak GPU memory (GB) across three models and two batch configurations (m = 1, k = n/2,
compressed scoring) on a single A40 GPU, with and without activation checkpointing (ckpt).
                                                                     n = 8, T = 512                                                                  n = 2, T = 1024
Model                  Setting      Full-Training    Layer-Wise Subset     Global Subset (1P)    Global Subset (2P)   Full-Training   Layer-Wise Subset    Global Subset (1P)   Global Subset (2P)
S MOL LM2-360M         No ckpt           9.4               10.3                   10.4                 10.4                5.7               7.7                   7.8                  7.7
                       With ckpt         4.6               4.9                    7.5                  4.9                 3.4               4.0                   6.0                  4.0
T INY L LAMA -1.1B     No ckpt          15.0               16.2                   16.2                 16.2               10.6               13.0                 13.0                  13.0
                       With ckpt        10.3               10.4                   14.5                 10.4               10.3               10.4                 12.5                  10.4
L LAMA -3.2-3B         No ckpt          37.9               40.7                   40.7                 40.7               29.9               33.2                 33.9                  33.2
                       With ckpt        29.9               30.1                   38.1                 30.1               29.9               30.1                 33.9                  30.1




                                                                                                 51
